<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act 4, Scene 4</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-4" epub:type="part">
	    <section id="act-4-scene-4" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
	      <h3 epub:type="title">Act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>
	        <span epub:type="subtitle">Scene <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span></span>
				</h3>
					<p>The same. The English Camp.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Audley</b>, and others.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</td><td>Audley, the arms of death embrace us round,<br/>And comfort have we none, save that to die<br/>We pay sower earnest for a sweeter life.<br/>At Cressey field out Clouds of Warlike smoke<br/>Choked up those French mouths and dissevered them;<br/>But now their multitudes of millions hide,<br/>Masking as twere, the beauteous burning Sun,<br/>Leaving no hope to us, but sullen dark<br/>And eyeless terror of all ending night.<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Audley</td><td>This sudden, mighty, and expedient head<br/>That they have made, fair prince, is wonderful.<br/>Before us in the valley lies the king,<br/>Vantaged with all that heaven and earth can yield;<br/>His party stronger battled than our whole:<br/>His son, the braving Duke of Normandy,<br/>Hath trimmed the Mountain on our right hand up<br/>In shining plate, that now the aspiring hill<br/>Shows like a silver quarry or an orb,<br/>Aloft the which the Banners, bannarets,<br/>And new replenished pendants cuff the air<br/>And beat the winds, that for their gaudiness<br/>Struggles to kiss them: on our left hand lies<br/>Phillip, the younger issue of the king,<br/>Coating the other hill in such array,<br/>That all his guilded upright pikes do seem<br/>Straight trees of gold, the pendants leaves;<br/>And their device of Antique heraldry,<br/>Quartered in colours, seeming sundry fruits,<br/>Makes it the Orchard of the Hesperides:<br/>Behind us too the hill doth bear his height,<br/>For like a half Moon, opening but one way,<br/>It rounds us in; there at our backs are lodged<br/>The fatal Crossbows, and the battle there<br/>Is governed by the rough Chattillion.<br/>Then thus it stands: the valley for our flight<br/>The king binds in; the hills on either hand<br/>Are proudly royalized by his sons;<br/>And on the Hill behind stands certain death<br/>In pay and service with Chattillion.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward.</td><td>Death’s name is much more mighty than his deeds;<br/>Thy parcelling this power hath made it more.<br/>As many sands as these my hands can hold,<br/>Are but my handful of so many sands;<br/>Then, all the world, and call it but a power,<br/>Easily ta’en up, and quickly thrown away:<br/>But if I stand to count them sand by sand,<br/>The number would confound my memory,<br/>And make a thousand millions of a task,<br/>Which briefly is no more, indeed, than one.<br/>These quarters, squadrons, and these regiments,<br/>Before, behind us, and on either hand,<br/>Are but a power. When we name a man,<br/>His hand, his foot, his head hath several strengths;<br/>And being all but one self instant strength,<br/>Why, all this many, Audley, is but one,<br/>And we can call it all but one man’s strength.<br/>He that hath far to go, tells it by miles;<br/>If he should tell the steps, it kills his heart:<br/>The drops are infinite, that make a flood,<br/>And yet, thou knowest, we call it but a Rain.<br/>There is but one France, one king of France,<br/>That France hath no more kings; and that same king<br/>Hath but the puissant legion of one king,<br/>And we have one: then apprehend no odds,<br/>For one to one is fair equality.<br/>
						<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter an Herald from <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</b>.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</td><td>What tidings, messenger? be plain and brief.<br/></td>
					</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Herald</td><td>The king of France, my sovereign Lord and master,<br/>Greets by me his foe, the Prince of Wales:<br/>If thou call forth a hundred men of name,<br/>Of Lords, Knights, Squires, and English gentlemen,<br/>And with thy self and those kneel at his feet,<br/>He straight will fold his bloody colours up,<br/>And ransom shall redeem lives forfeited;<br/>If not, this day shall drink more English blood,<br/>Than ere was buried in our British earth.<br/>What is the answer to his proffered mercy?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</td><td>This heaven, that covers France, contains the mercy<br/>That draws from me submissive orizons;<br/>That such base breath should vanish from my lips,<br/>To urge the plea of mercy to a man,<br/>The Lord forbid! Return, and tell the king,<br/>My tongue is made of steel, and it shall beg<br/>My mercy on his coward burgonet;<br/>Tell him, my colours are as red as his,<br/>My men as bold, our English arms as strong:<br/>Return him my defiance in his face.<br/></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Herald</td><td>I go.<br/>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i><br/>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter another <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Herald</b>.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</td><td>What news with thee?<br/></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Herald</td><td>The Duke of Normandy, my Lord &amp; master,<br/>Pitying thy youth is so ingirt with peril,<br/>By me hath sent a nimble jointed jennet,<br/>As swift as ever yet thou didst bestride,<br/>And therewithall he counsels thee to fly;<br/>Else death himself hath sworn that thou shalt die.<br/></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</td><td>Back with the beast unto the beast that sent him!<br/>Tell him I cannot sit a coward’s horse;<br/>Bid him to day bestride the jade himself,<br/>For I will stain my horse quite o’er with blood,<br/>And double gild my spurs, but I will catch him;<br/>So tell the carping boy, and get thee gone.<br/>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Herald</b>.</i><br/>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter another <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Herald</b>.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Herald</td><td>Edward of Wales, Phillip, the second son<br/>To the most mighty christian king of France,<br/>Seeing thy body’s living date expired,<br/>All full of charity and christian love,<br/>Commends this book, full fraught with prayers,<br/>To thy fair hand and for thy hour of life<br/>Intreats thee that thou meditate therein,<br/>And arm thy soul for her long journey towards⁠—<br/>Thus have I done his bidding, and return.<br/></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</td><td>Herald of Phillip, greet thy Lord from me:<br/>All good that he can send, I can receive;<br/>But thinkst thou not, the unadvised boy<br/>Hath wronged himself in thus far tendering me?<br/>Happily he cannot pray without the book⁠—<br/>I think him no divine extemporall⁠—,<br/>Then render back this common place of prayer,<br/>To do himself good in adversity;<br/>Beside he knows not my sins’ quality,<br/>And therefore knows no prayers for my avail;<br/>Ere night his prayer may be to pray to God,<br/>To put it in my heart to hear his prayer.<br/>So tell the courtly wanton, and be gone.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Herald</td><td>I go.<br/>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</td><td>How confident their strength and number makes them!⁠—<br/>Now, Audley, sound those silver wings of thine,<br/>And let those milk white messengers of time<br/>Show thy times learning in this dangerous time.<br/>Thy self art bruis’d and bit with many broils,<br/>And stratagems forepast with iron pens<br/>Are texted in thine honorable face;<br/>Thou art a married man in this distress,<br/>But danger woos me as a blushing maid:<br/>Teach me an answer to this perilous time.<br/></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Audley</td><td>To die is all as common as to live:<br/>The one ince-wise, the other holds in chase;<br/>For, from the instant we begin to live,<br/>We do pursue and hunt the time to die:<br/>First bud we, then we blow, and after seed,<br/>Then, presently, we fall; and, as a shade<br/>Follows the body, so we follow death.<br/>If, then, we hunt for death, why do we fear it?<br/>If we fear it, why do we follow it?<br/>If we do fear, how can we shun it?<br/>If we do fear, with fear we do but aide<br/>The thing we fear to seize on us the sooner:<br/>If we fear not, then no resolved proffer<br/>Can overthrow the limit of our fate;<br/>For, whether ripe or rotten, drop we shall,<br/>As we do draw the lottery of our doom.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</td><td>Ah, good old man, a thousand thousand armors<br/>These words of thine have buckled on my back:<br/>Ah, what an idiot hast thou made of life,<br/>To seek the thing it fears! and how disgraced<br/>The imperial victory of murdering death,<br/>Since all the lives his conquering arrows strike<br/>Seek him, and he not them, to shame his glory!<br/>I will not give a penny for a life,<br/>Nor half a halfpenny to shun grim death,<br/>Since for to live is but to seek to die,<br/>And dying but beginning of new life.<br/>Let come the hour when he that rules it will!<br/>To live or die I hold indifferent.
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
			<p><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
