<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act 4, Scene 2</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-4" epub:type="part">
	    <section id="act-4-scene-2" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
	      <h3 epub:type="title">Act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>
	        <span epub:type="subtitle">Scene <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></span></h3>
			<p>Picardy. The English Camp before Calais.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Derby</b>, with Soldiers.</i></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Since they refuse our proffered league, my Lord,<br/>And will not ope their gates, and let us in,<br/>We will intrench our selves on every side,<br/>That neither vituals nor supply of men<br/>May come to succour this accursed town:<br/>Famine shall combat where our swords are stopped.<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter six poor Frenchmen.</i></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Derby</td><td>The promised aid, that made them stand aloof,<br/>Is now retired and gone an other way:<br/>It will repent them of their stubborn will.<br/>But what are these poor ragged slaves, my Lord?<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Ask what they are; it seems, they come from Callis.</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Derby</td><td>You wretched patterns of despair and woe,<br/>What are you, living men or gliding ghosts,<br/>Crept from your graves to walk upon the earth?</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Poor</td><td>No ghosts, my Lord, but men that breath a life<br/>Far worse than is the quiet sleep of death:<br/>We are distressed poor inhabitants,<br/>That long have been diseased, sick, and lame;<br/>And now, because we are not fit to serve,<br/>The Captain of the town hath thrust us forth,<br/>That so expense of victuals may be saved.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>A charitable deed, no doubt, and worthy praise!<br/>But how do you imagine then to speed?<br/>We are your enemies; in such a case<br/>We can no less but put ye to the sword,<br/>Since, when we proffered truce, it was refused.</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Poor</td><td>And if your grace no otherwise vouchsafe,<br/>As welcome death is unto us as life.</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Poor silly men, much wronged and more distressed!<br/>Go, Derby, go, and see they be relieved;<br/>Command that victuals be appointed them,<br/>And give to everyone five Crowns a piece.<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Derby</b> and Frenchmen.</i><br/>The Lion scorns to touch the yielding prey,<br/>And Edward’s sword must flesh it self in such<br/>As wilful stubbornness hath made perverse.<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Percy</b>.</i></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Lord Percy! welcome: what’s the news in England?<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Percy</td><td>The Queen, my Lord, comes here to your Grace,<br/>And from her highness and the Lord viceregent<br/>I bring this happy tidings of success:<br/>David of Scotland, lately up in arms,<br/>Thinking, belike, he soonest should prevail,<br/>Your highness being absent from the Realm,<br/>Is, by the fruitful service of your peers<br/>And painful travel of the Queen her self,<br/>That, big with child, was every day in arms,<br/>Vanquished, subdued, and taken prisoner.</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Thanks, Percy, for thy news, with all my heart!<br/>What was he took him prisoner in the field?</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Percy</td><td>A Esquire, my Lord; John Copland is his name:<br/>Who since, intreated by her Majesty,<br/>Denies to make surrender of his prize<br/>To any but unto your grace alone;<br/>Whereat the Queen is grievously displeased.</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Well, then we’ll have a Pursiuvant despatched,<br/>To summon Copland hither out of hand,<br/>And with him he shall bring his prisoner king.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
				<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Percy</td><td>The Queen’s, my Lord, her self by this at Sea,<br/>And purposeth, as soon as wind will serve,<br/>To land at Callis, and to visit you.</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>She shall be welcome; and, to wait her coming,<br/>I’ll pitch my tent near to the sandy shore.<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter a French <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Captain</b>.</i></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Captain</td><td>The Burgesses of Callis, mighty king,<br/>Have by a counsel willingly decreed<br/>To yield the town and Castle to your hands,<br/>Upon condition it will please your grace<br/>To grant them benefit of life and goods.</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>They will so! Then, belike, they may command,<br/>Dispose, elect, and govern as they list.<br/>No, sirra, tell them, since they did refuse<br/>Our princely clemency at first proclaimed,<br/>They shall not have it now, although they would;<br/>I will accept of nought but fire and sword,<br/>Except, within these two days, six of them,<br/>That are the wealthiest merchants in the town,<br/>Come naked, all but for their linen shirts,<br/>With each a halter hanged about his neck,<br/>And prostrate yield themselves, upon their knees,<br/>To be afflicted, hanged, or what I please;<br/>And so you may inform their masterships.<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Edward</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Percy</b>.</i></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Captain</td><td>Why, this it is to trust a broken staff:<br/>Had we not been persuaded, John our King<br/>Would with his army have relieved the town,<br/>We had not stood upon defiance so:<br/>But now tis past that no man can recall,<br/>And better some do go to wrack them all.<br/>
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
			<p><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></p>
		</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
