<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act 2, Scene 1</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-2" epub:type="part">
	    <section id="act-2-scene-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>
	        <span epub:type="subtitle">Scene <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></span></h3>
					<p>The Same. Gardens of the Castle</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodwick.</b></i></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodwick</td><td>I might perceive his eye in her eye lost,<br/>His ear to drink her sweet tongue’s utterance,<br/>And changing passion, like inconstant clouds<br/>That rack upon the carriage of the winds,<br/>Increase and die in his disturbed cheeks.<br/>Lo, when she blush’d, even then did he look pale,<br/>As if her cheeks by some enchanted power,<br/>Attracted had the cherry blood from his:<br/>Anon, with reverent fear when she grew pale,<br/>His cheeks put on their scarlet ornaments;<br/>But no more like her oriental red,<br/>Than brick to coral or live things to dead.<br/>Why did he then thus counterfeit her looks?<br/>If she did blush, ’twas tender modest shame,<br/>Being in the sacred presence of a king;<br/>If he did blush, ’twas red immodest shame,<br/>To vail his eyes amiss, being a king;<br/>If she look’d pale, ’twas silly woman’s fear,<br/>To bear herself in presence of a king;<br/>If he look’d pale, it was with guilty fear,<br/>To dote amiss, being a mighty king.<br/>Then, Scottish wars, farewell; I fear ’twill prove<br/>A ling’ring English siege of peevish love.<br/>Here comes his highness, walking all alone.<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</b>.</i></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>She is grown more fairer far since I came hither,<br/>Her voice more silver every word than other,<br/>Her wit more fluent. What a strange discourse<br/>Unfolded she of David and his Scots!<br/>‘Even thus,’ quoth she, ‘he spake,’ and then spoke broad,<br/>With epithets and accents of the Scot,<br/>But somewhat better than the Scot could speak:<br/>‘And thus,’ quoth she, and answer’d then herself⁠—<br/>For who could speak like her but she herself⁠<br/>Breathes from the wall an angel’s note from heaven<br/>Of sweet defiance to her barbarous foes.<br/>When she would talk of peace, methinks, her tongue<br/>Commanded war to prison; when of war,<br/>It waken’d Caesar from his Roman grave,<br/>To hear war beautified by her discourse.<br/>Wisdom is foolishness, but in her tongue,<br/>Beauty a slander, but in her fair face,<br/>There is no summer, but in her cheerful looks,<br/>Nor frosty winter, but in her disdain.<br/>I cannot blame the Scots that did besiege her,<br/>For she is all the treasure of our land;<br/>But call them cowards, that they ran away,<br/>Having so rich and fair a cause to stay.⁠<br/>Art thou there, Lodwick? Give me ink and paper.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodwick</td><td>I will, my sovereign.</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>And bid the lords hold on their play at chess,<br/>For we will walk and meditate alone.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodwick</td><td>I will, my liege.<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodwick</b>.</i></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>This fellow is well read in poetry,<br/>And hath a lusty and persuasive spirit;<br/>I will acquaint him with my passion,<br/>Which he shall shadow with a veil of lawn,<br/>Through which the queen of beaut’s queens shall see<br/>Herself the ground of my infirmity.<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodwick</b>.</i>
			<br/>Hast thou pen, ink, and paper ready, Lodwick?</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodwick</td><td>Ready, my liege.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Then in the summer arbour sit by me,<br/>Make it our council-house or cabinet:<br/>Since green our thoughts, green be the conventicle,<br/>Where we will ease us by disburd’ning them.<br/>Now, Lodwick, invocate some golden muse,<br/>To bring thee hither an enchanted pen,<br/>That may, for sighs, set down true sighs indeed,<br/>Talking of grief, to make thee ready groan;<br/>And when thou writ’st of tears, encouch the word<br/>Before and after, with such sweet laments,<br/>That it may raise drops in a Tartar’s eye,<br/>And make a flintheart Scythian pitiful;<br/>For so much moving hath a poet’s pen;<br/>Then, if thou be a poet, move thou so,<br/>And be enriched by thy sovereign’s love.<br/>For, if the touch of sweet concordant strings<br/>Could force attendance in the ears of hell,<br/>How much more shall the strains of poet’s wit<br/>Beguile and ravish soft and humane minds?</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodwick</td><td>To whom, my Lord, shall I direct my style?</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>To one that shames the fair and sots the wise;<br/>Whose body is an abstract or a brief,<br/>Contains each general virtue in the world.<br/>Better than beautiful, thou must begin,<br/>Devise for fair a fairer word than fair,<br/>And every ornament that thou wouldst praise,<br/>Fly it a pitch above the soar of praise.<br/>For flattery fear thou not to be convicted;<br/>For, were thy admiration ten times more,<br/>Ten times ten thousand more the worth exceeds,<br/>Of that thou art to praise, thy praise’s worth.<br/>Begin, I will to contemplate the while:<br/>Forget not to set down, how passionate,<br/>How heartsick, and how full of languishment,<br/>Her beauty makes me.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodwick</td><td>Write I to a woman?</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>What beauty else could triumph over me,<br/>Or who but women do our love lays greet?<br/>What, think’st thou I did bid thee praise a horse?</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodwick</td><td>Of what condition or estate she is,<br/>’Twere requisite that I should know, my Lord.</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Of such estate, that hers is as a throne,<br/>And my estate the footstool where she treads:<br/>Then may’st thou judge what her condition is<br/>By the proportion of her mightiness.<br/>Write on, while I peruse her in my thoughts.⁠<br/>Her voice to music or the nightingale⁠:<br/>To music every summer leaping swain<br/>Compares his sunburnt lover when she speaks;<br/>And why should I speak of the nightingale?<br/>The nightingale sings of adulterate wrong;<br/>And that, compar’d, is too satirical;<br/>For sin, though sin, would not be so esteem’d;<br/>But, rather, virtue sin, sin virtue deem’d.<br/>Her hair, far softer than the silkworm’s twist,<br/>Like to a flattering glass, doth make more fair<br/>The yellow amber:⁠ like a flattering glass<br/>Comes in too soon; for, writing of her eyes,<br/>I’ll say that like a glass they catch the sun,<br/>And thence the hot reflection doth rebound<br/>Against the breast, and burns my heart within.<br/>Ah, what a world of descant makes my soul<br/>Upon this voluntary ground of love!⁠—<br/>Come, Lodwick, hast thou turn’d thy ink to gold?<br/>If not, write but in letters capital<br/>My mistress’ name, and it will gild thy paper:<br/>Read, Lodwick, read;<br/>Fill thou the empty hollows of mine ears<br/>With the sweet hearing of thy poetry.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodwick</td><td>I have not to a period brought her praise.</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Her praise is as my love, both infinite,<br/>Which apprehend such violent extremes,<br/>That they disdain an ending period.<br/>Her beauty hath no match but my affection;<br/>Hers more than most, mine most, and more than more:<br/>Hers more to praise than tell the sea by drops,<br/>Nay, more, than drop the massy earth by sands,<br/>And, sand by sand print them in memory:<br/>Then wherefore talk’st thou of a period<br/>To that which craves unended admiration?<br/>Read, let us hear.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodwick</td><td>‘More fair and chaste than is the queen of shades,’⁠—<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>That line hath two faults, gross and palpable:<br/>Compar’st thou her to the pale queen of night,<br/>Who, being set in dark, seems therefore light?<br/>What is she, when the sun lifts up his head,<br/>But like a fading taper, dim and dead?<br/>My love shall brave the eye of heaven at noon,<br/>And, being unmask’d, outshine the golden sun.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodwick</td><td>What is the other fault, my sovereign Lord?</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Read o’er the line again.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodwick</td><td>‘More fair and chaste’⁠—<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>I did not bid thee talk of chastity,<br/>To ransack so the treasure of her mind;<br/>For I had rather have her chas’d, than chaste.<br/>Out with the moon line, I will none of it;<br/>And let me have her liken’d to the sun:<br/>Say she hath thrice more splendour than the sun,<br/>That her perfections emulate the sun,<br/>That she breeds sweets as plenteous as the sun,<br/>That she doth thaw cold winter like the sun,<br/>That she doth cheer fresh summer like the sun,<br/>That she doth dazzle gazers like the sun;<br/>And, in this application to the sun,<br/>Bid her be free and general as the sun,<br/>Who smiles upon the basest weed that grows<br/>As lovingly as on the fragrant rose.<br/>Let’s see what follows that same moonlight line.</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodwick</td><td>‘More fair and chaste than is the queen of shades,<br/>More bold in constancy’⁠—</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>In constancy! than who?<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodwick</td><td>‘Than Judith was.’<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>O monstrous line! Put in the next a sword,<br/>And I shall woo her to cut off my head.<br/>Blot, blot, good Lodwick! Let us hear the next.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodwick</td><td>There’s all that yet is done.</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>I thank thee then; thou hast done little ill,<br/>But what is done, is passing, passing ill.<br/>No, let the captain talk of boist’rous war,<br/>The prisoner, of emured dark constraint,<br/>The sick man best sets down the pangs of death,<br/>The man that starves, the sweetness of a feast,<br/>The frozen soul the benefit of fire,<br/>And every grief, his happy opposite:<br/>Love cannot sound well, but in lover’s tongues;<br/>Give me the pen and paper, I will write.<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</b>.</i><br/>But soft, here comes the treasurer of my spirit.⁠—<br/>Lodwick, thou know’st not how to draw a battle;<br/>These wings, these flankers, and these squadrons<br/>Argue in thee defective discipline:<br/>Thou shouldst have plac’d this here, this other here.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td><td>Pardon my boldness, my thrice gracious lord;<br/>Let my intrusion here be call’d my duty,<br/>That comes to see my sovereign how he fares.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Go, draw the same, I tell thee in what form.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodwick</td><td>I go.<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodwick</b>.</i></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td><td>Sorry I am to see my liege so sad:<br/>What may thy subject do to drive from thee<br/>Thy gloomy consort, sullen melancholy?</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Ah, lady, I am blunt, and cannot straw<br/>The flowers of solace in a ground of shame:⁠—<br/>Since I came hither, countess, I am wrong’d.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td><td>Now, God forbid, that any in my house<br/>Should think my sovereign wrong! Thrice gentle king,<br/>Acquaint me with your cause of discontent.</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>How near then shall I be to remedy?</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td><td>As near, my liege, as all my woman’s power<br/>Can pawn it self to buy thy remedy.</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>If thou speak’st true, then have I my redress:<br/>Engage thy power to redeem my joys,<br/>And I am joyful, countess; else, I die.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td><td>I will, my liege.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Swear, Countess, that thou wilt.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td><td>By heaven, I will.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Then take thyself a little way aside,<br/>And tell thyself, a king doth dote on thee;<br/>Say that within thy power it doth lie<br/>To make him happy, and that thou hast sworn<br/>To give him all the joy within thy power:<br/>Do this, and tell me, when I shall be happy.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td><td>All this is done, my thrice dread sovereign:<br/>That power of love, that I have power to give,<br/>Thou hast with all devout obedience;<br/>Employ me how thou wilt in proof thereof.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Thou hear’st me say that I do dote on thee.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td><td>If on my beauty, take it if thou canst;<br/>Though little, I do prize it ten times less;<br/>If on my virtue, take it if thou canst,<br/>For virtue’s store by giving doth augment;<br/>Be it on what it will, that I can give<br/>And thou canst take away, inherit it.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>It is thy beauty that I would enjoy.<br/></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td><td>O, were it painted, I would wipe it off<br/>And dispossess myself, to give it thee.<br/>But, sovereign, it is solder’d to my life:<br/>Take one, and both; for, like an humble shadow,<br/>It haunts the sunshine of my summer’s life.</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>But thou may’st lend it me, to sport withal.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td><td>As easy may my intellectual soul<br/>Be lent away, and yet my body live,<br/>As lend my body, palace to my soul,<br/>Away from her, and yet retain my soul.<br/>My body is her bower, her court, her abbey,<br/>And she an angel, pure, divine, unspotted:<br/>If I should leave her house, my lord, to thee,<br/>I kill my poor soul, and my poor soul me.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Didst thou not swear to give me what I would?<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td><td>I did, my liege, so, what you would I could.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>I wish no more of thee than thou may’st give:⁠—<br/>Nor beg I do not, but I rather buy⁠—<br/>That is, thy love; and for that love of thine<br/>In rich exchange, I tender to thee mine.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td><td>But that your lips were sacred, my Lord,<br/>You would profane the holy name of love.<br/>That love, you offer me, you cannot give,<br/>For Caesar owes that tribute to his queen;<br/>That love, you beg of me, I cannot give,<br/>For Sara owes that duty to her Lord.<br/>He that doth clip or counterfeit your stamp<br/>Shall die, my lord; and will your sacred self<br/>Commit high treason against the King of heaven,<br/>To stamp his image in forbidden metal,<br/>Forgetting your allegiance and your oath?<br/>In violating marriage’ sacred law,<br/>You break a greater honor than yourself:<br/>To be a king is of a younger house<br/>Than to be married; your progenitor,<br/>Sole reigning Adam on the universe,<br/>By God was honour’d for a married man,<br/>But not by him anointed for a king.<br/>It is a penalty to break your statutes,<br/>Though not enacted with your highness’ hand:<br/>How much more, to infringe the holy act,<br/>Made by the mouth of God, seal’d with his hand?<br/>I know, my sovereign, in my husband’s love,<br/>Who now doth loyal service in his wars,<br/>Doth but to try the wife of Salisbury,<br/>Whither she will hear a wanton’s tale, or no,<br/>Lest being therein guilty by my stay,<br/>;From that, not from my liege, I turn away.<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Whether is her beauty by her words divine,<br/>Or are her words sweet chaplains to her beauty?<br/>Like as the wind doth beautify a sail,<br/>And as a sail becomes the unseen wind,<br/>So do her words her beauty, beauty words.<br/>O, that I were a honey gathering bee,<br/>To bear the comb of virtue from this flower,<br/>And not a poison sucking envious spider,<br/>To turn the juice I take to deadly venom!<br/>Religion is austere, and beauty gentle;<br/>Too strict a guardian for so fair a ward!<br/>O, that she were, as is the air, to me!<br/>Why, so she is, for when I would embrace her,<br/>This do I, and catch nothing but myself.<br/>I must enjoy her; for I cannot beat<br/>With reason and reproof, fond love away.<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</b>.</i><br/>Here comes her father: I will work with him,<br/>To bear my colours in this field of love.</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td><td>How is it, that my sovereign is so sad?<br/>May I with pardon know your highness’ grief;<br/>And that my old endeavour will remove it,<br/>It shall not cumber long your majesty.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>A kind and voluntary gift thou proffer’st,<br/>That I was forward to have begg’d of thee.<br/>But, O thou world, great nurse of flattery,<br/>Why dost thou tip men’s tongues with golden words,<br/>And peise their deeds with weight of heavy lead,<br/>That fair performance cannot follow promise?<br/>O, that a man might hold the heart’s close book<br/>And choke the lavish tongue, when it doth utter<br/>The breath of falsehood not character’d there!<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td><td>Far be it from the honor of my age,<br/>That I should owe bright gold and render lead;<br/>Age is a cynic, not a flatterer.<br/>I say again, that if I knew your grief,<br/>And that by me it may be lessened,<br/>My proper harm should buy your highness’ good.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>These are the vulgar tenders of false men,<br/>That never pay the duty of their words.<br/>Thou wilt not stick to swear what thou hast said;<br/>But, when thou knowest my grief’s condition,<br/>This rash disgorged vomit of thy word<br/>Thou wilt eat up again, and leave me helpless.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td><td>By heaven, I will not, though your majesty<br/>Did bid me run upon your sword and die.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Say that my grief is no way med’cinable<br/>But by the loss and bruising of thine honour.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td><td>If nothing but that loss may vantage you,<br/>I would account that loss my vantage too.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Think’st that thou canst unswear thy oath again?<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td><td>I cannot; nor I would not, if I could.<br/></td>
</tr>
<tr>
				<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td> <td>But, if thou dost, what shall I say to thee?</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td><td>What may be said to any perjur’d villain,<br/>That breaks the sacred warrant of an oath?<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>What wilt thou say to one that breaks an oath?</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td><td>That he hath broke his faith with God and man,<br/>And from them both stands excommunicate.</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>What office were it, to suggest a man<br/>To break a lawful and religious vow?</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td><td>An office for the devil, not for man.</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>That devil’s office must thou do for me,<br/>Or break thy oath, or cancel all the bonds<br/>Of love and duty ’twixt thyself and me;<br/>And therefore, Warwick, if thou art thyself,<br/>The Lord and master of thy word and oath,<br/>Go to thy daughter; and in my behalf<br/>Command her, woo her, win her any ways,<br/>To be my mistress and my secret love.<br/>I will not stand to hear thee make reply:<br/>Thy oath break hers, or let thy sovereign die.<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td><td>O doting king! O detestable office!<br/>Well may I tempt myself to wrong myself,<br/>When he hath sworn me by the name of God<br/>To break a vow made by the name of God.<br/>What if I swear by this right hand of mine<br/>To cut this right hand off? The better way<br/>Were to profane the idol than confound it:<br/>But neither will I do; I’ll keep mine oath,<br/>And to my daughter make a recantation<br/>Of all the virtue I have preach’d to her:<br/>I’ll say, she must forget her husband Salisbury,<br/>If she remember to embrace the king;<br/>I’ll say, an oath may easily be broken,<br/>But not so easily pardon’d, being broken;<br/>I’ll say, it is true charity to love,<br/>But not true love to be so charitable;<br/>I’ll say, his greatness may bear out the shame,<br/>But not his kingdom can buy out the sin;<br/>I’ll say, it is my duty to persuade,<br/>But not her honesty to give consent.<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</b>.</i><br/>See where she comes; was never father had<br/>Against his child an embassage so bad.</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td><td>My lord and father, I have sought for you:<br/>My mother and the peers importune you<br/>To keep in presence of his majesty,<br/>And do your best to make his highness merry.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td><td>How shall I enter in this arrant errand?<br/>I must not call her child, for where’s the father<br/>That will in such a suit seduce his child?<br/>Then, Wife of Salisbury; shall I so begin?<br/>No, he’s my friend, and where is found the friend<br/>That will do friendship such endamagement?<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</b>.</i>
			Neither my daughter nor my dear friend’s wife,<br/>I am not Warwick, as thou think’st I am,<br/>But an attorney from the court of hell,<br/>That thus have hous’d my spirit in his form,<br/>To do a message to thee from the king.<br/>The mighty King of England dotes on thee:<br/>He that hath power to take away thy life,<br/>Hath power to take thine honour; then consent<br/>To pawn thine honour rather than thy life:<br/>Honour is often lost and got again,<br/>But life, once gone, hath no recovery.<br/>The sun, that withers hay, doth nourish grass;<br/>The king, that would disdain thee, will advance thee.<br/>The poets write that great Achilles’ spear<br/>Could heal the wound it made: the moral is,<br/>What mighty men misdo, they can amend.<br/>The lion doth become his bloody jaws,<br/>And grace his foragement by being mild,<br/>When vassel fear lies trembling at his feet.<br/>The king will in his glory hide thy shame;<br/>And those that gaze on him to find out thee,<br/>Will lose their eyesight, looking in the sun.<br/>What can one drop of poison harm the sea,<br/>Whose huge vastures can digest the ill<br/>And make it loose his operation?<br/>The king’s great name will temper thy misdeeds,<br/>And give the bitter potion of reproach,<br/>A sugar’d, sweet and most delicious taste.<br/>Besides, it is no harm to do the thing<br/>Which without shame could not be left undone.<br/>Thus have I in his majesty’s behalf<br/>Apparell’d sin in virtuous sentences,<br/>And dwell upon thy answer in his suit.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td><td>Unnatural besiege! Woe me unhappy,<br/>To have escap’d the danger of my foes,<br/>And to be ten times worse envir’d by friends!<br/>Hath he no means to stain my honest blood,<br/>But to corrupt the author of my blood<br/>To be his scandalous and vile solicitor?<br/>No marvel though the branches be then infected,<br/>When poison hath encompassed the root:<br/>No marvel though the leprous infant die,<br/>When the stern dam envenometh the dug.<br/>Why then, give sin a passport to offend,<br/>And youth the dangerous reign of liberty:<br/>Blot out the strict forbidding of the law,<br/>And cancel every canon, that prescribes<br/>A shame for shame or penance for offence.<br/>No, let me die, if his too boist’rous will<br/>Will have it so, before I will consent<br/>To be an actor in his graceless lust.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td><td>Why, now thou speak’st as I would have thee speak:<br/>And mark how I unsay my words again.<br/>An honourable grave is more esteem’d<br/>Than the polluted closet of a king:<br/>The greater man, the greater is the thing,<br/>Be it good or bad, that he shall undertake:<br/>An unreputed mote, flying in the sun,<br/>Presents a greater substance than it is:<br/>The freshest summer’s day doth soonest taint<br/>The loathed carrion that it seems to kiss:<br/>Deep are the blows made with a mighty axe:<br/>That sin doth ten times aggravate itself,<br/>That is committed in a holy place:<br/>An evil deed, done by authority,<br/>Is sin and subornation: deck an ape<br/>In tissue, and the beauty of the robe<br/>Adds but the greater scorn unto the beast.<br/>A spacious field of reasons could I urge<br/>Between his glory, daughter, and thy shame:<br/>That poison shows worst in a golden cup;<br/>Dark night seems darker by the lightning flash;<br/>Lilies that fester smell far worse than weeds;<br/>And every glory that inclines to sin,<br/>The shame is treble by the opposite.<br/>So leave I, with my blessing in thy bosom,<br/>Which then convert to a most heavy curse,<br/>When thou convert’st from honour’s golden name<br/>To the black faction of bed blotting shame.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td><td>I’ll follow thee; and when my mind turns so,<br/>My body sink my soul in endless woe!<br/>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
			<p><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
