<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act 3, Scene 1</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-3" epub:type="part">
	    <section id="act-3-scene-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
	      <h3 epub:type="title">Act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>
	        <span epub:type="subtitle">Scene <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></span></h3>
			<p>Flanders. The French Camp.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King John of France</b>, his two sons, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Charles of<br/>Normandy</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Phillip</b>, and the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of Lorrain</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td><td>Here, till our Navy of a thousand sail<br/>Have made a breakfast to our foe by Sea,<br/>Let us encamp, to wait their happy speed.⁠—<br/>Lorraine, what readiness is Edward in?<br/>How hast thou heard that he provided is<br/>Of marshall furniture for this exploit?<br/></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lorraine</td><td>To lay aside unnecessary soothing,<br/>And not to spend the time in circumstance,<br/>Tis bruited for a certainty, my Lord,<br/>That he’s exceeding strongly fortified;<br/>His subjects flock as willingly to war,<br/>As if unto a triumph they were led.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Charles</td><td>England was wont to harbour malcontents,<br/>Blood thirsty and seditious Catelynes,<br/>Spend thrifts, and such as gape for nothing else<br/>But changing and alteration of the state;<br/>And is it possible<br/>That they are now so loyal in them selves?<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LorrainE</td><td>All but the Scot, who solemnly protests,<br/>As heretofore I have informed his grace,<br/>Never to sheath his Sword or take a truce.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td><td>Ah, that’s the anchorage of some better hope!<br/>But, on the other side, to think what friends<br/>King Edward hath retained in Netherland,<br/>Among those ever-bibbing Epicures,<br/>Those frothy Dutch men, puft with double beer,<br/>That drink and swill in every place they come,<br/>Doth not a little aggravate mine ire;<br/>Besides, we hear, the Emperor conjoins,<br/>And stalls him in his own authority;<br/>But, all the mightier that their number is,<br/>The greater glory reaps the victory.<br/>Some friends have we beside domestic power;<br/>The stern Polonian, and the warlike Dane,<br/>The king of Bohemia, and of Sicily,<br/>Are all become confederates with us,<br/>And, as I think, are marching hither apace.<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Drum within.</i><br/>But soft, I hear the music of their drums,<br/>By which I guess that their approach is near.<br/><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King of Bohemia</b>, with Danes, and a<br/><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Polonian Captain</b>, with other soldiers, another way.</i></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King of Bohemia</td><td>King John of France, as league and neighborhood<br/>Requires, when friends are any way distrest,<br/>I come to aide thee with my country’s force.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Polonian Captain</td><td>And from great Musco, fearful to the Turk,<br/>And lofty Poland, nurse of hardy men,<br/>I bring these servitors to fight for thee,<br/>Who willingly will venture in thy cause.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td><td>Welcome, Bohemian king, and welcome all:<br/>This your great kindness I will not forget.<br/>Besides your plentiful rewards in Crowns,<br/>That from our Treasury ye shall receive,<br/>There comes a hare brained Nation, decked in pride,<br/>The spoil of whom will be a treble gain.<br/>And now my hope is full, my joy complete:<br/>At Sea, we are as puissant as the force<br/>Of Agamemnon in the Haven of Troy;<br/>By land, with Zerxes we compare of strength,<br/>Whose soldiers drank up rivers in their thirst;<br/>Then Bayardlike, blind, overweaning Ned,<br/>To reach at our imperial diadem<br/>Is either to be swallowed of the waves,<br/>Or hacked a pieces when thou comest ashore.<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Mariner</b>.</i></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mariner</td><td>Near to the coast I have descried, my Lord,<br/>As I was buy in my watchful charge,<br/>The proud Armado of king Edward’s ships:<br/>Which, at the first, far off when I did ken,<br/>Seemed as it were a grove of withered pines;<br/>But, drawing near, their glorious bright aspect,<br/>Their streaming Ensigns, wrought of coloured silk,<br/>Like to a meadow full of sundry flowers,<br/>Adorns the naked bosom of the earth:<br/>Majestical the order of their course,<br/>Figuring the horned Circle of the Moon:<br/>And on the top gallant of the Admiral<br/>And likewise all the handmaids of his train<br/>The Arms of England and of France unite<br/>Are quartered equally by Heralds’ art:<br/>Thus, tightly carried with a merry gale,<br/>They plough the Ocean hitherward amain.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td><td>Dare he already crop the Fleur de Luce?<br/>I hope, the honey being gathered thence,<br/>He, with the spider, afterward approached,<br/>Shall suck forth deadly venom from the leaves.⁠—<br/>But where’s our Navy? how are they prepared<br/>To wing them selves against this flight of Ravens?<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mariner</td><td>They, having knowledge, brought them by the scouts,<br/>Did break from Anchor straight, and, puffed with rage,<br/>No otherwise then were their sails with wind,<br/>Made forth, as when the empty Eagle flies,<br/>To satisfy his hungry griping maw.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td><td>There’s for thy news. Return unto thy bark;<br/>And if thou scape the bloody stroke of war<br/>And do survive the conflict, come again,<br/>And let us hear the manner of the fight.<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Mariner</b>.</i><br/>Mean space, my Lords, tis best we be dispersed<br/>To several places, least they chance to land:<br/>First you, my Lord, with your Bohemian Troops,<br/>Shall pitch your battailes on the lower hand;<br/>My eldest son, the Duke of Normandy,<br/>Together with the aide of Muscovites,<br/>Shall climb the higher ground another way;<br/>Here in the middle cost, betwixt you both,<br/>Phillip, my youngest boy, and I will lodge.<br/>So, Lors, be gone, and look unto your charge:<br/>You stand for France, an Empire fair and large.<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i><br/>Now tell me, Phillip, what is thy concept,<br/>Touching the challenge that the English make?<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phillip</td><td>I say, my Lord, claim Edward what he can,<br/>And bring he ne’er so plain a pedigree,<br/>Tis you are in the possession of the Crown,<br/>And that’s the surest point of all the Law:<br/>But, were it not, yet ere he should prevail,<br/>I’ll make a Conduit of my dearest blood,<br/>Or chase those straggling upstarts home again.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td><td>Well said, young Phillip! Call for bread and Wine,<br/>That we may cheer our stomachs with repast,<br/>To look our foes more sternly in the face.<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">A Table and Provisions brought in. The battle hard a far off.</i><br/>Now is begun the heavy day at Sea:<br/>Fight, Frenchmen, fight; be like the field of Bears,<br/>When they defend their younglings in the Caves!<br/>Stir, angry Nemesis, the happy helm,<br/>That, with the sulphur battles of your rage,<br/>The English Fleet may be dispersed and sunk.<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Shot.</i></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phillip</td><td>O Father, how this echoing Cannon shot,<br/>Like sweet harmony, digests my eats!<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td><td>Now, boy, thou hearest what thundering terror tis,<br/>To buckle for a kingdom’s sovereignty:<br/>The earth, with giddy trembling when it shakes,<br/>Or when the exhalations of the air<br/>Breaks in extremity of lightning flash,<br/>Affrights not more than kings, when they dispose<br/>To shew the rancor of their high swollen hearts.<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Retreat.</i><br/>Retreat is sounded; one side hath the worse;<br/>O, if it be the French, sweet fortune, turn;<br/>And, in thy turning, change the forward winds,<br/>That, with advantage of a favoring sky,<br/>Our men may vanquish, and the other fly!<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Mariner</b>.</i><br/>My heart misgives:⁠—say, mirror of pale death,<br/>To whom belongs the honor of this day?<br/>Relate, I pray thee, if thy breath will serve,<br/>The sad discourse of this discomfiture.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mariner</td><td>I will, my Lord.<br/>My gracious sovereign, France hath ta’en the foil,<br/>And boasting Edward triumphs with success.<br/>These Iron hearted Navies,<br/>When last I was reporter to your grace,<br/>Both full of angry spleen, of hope, and fear,<br/>Hasting to meet each other in the face,<br/>At last conjoined; and by their Admiral<br/>Our Admiral encountered many shot:<br/>By this, the other, that beheld these twain<br/>Give earnest penny of a further wrack,<br/>Like fiery Dragons took their haughty flight;<br/>And, likewise meeting, from their smoky wombs<br/>Sent many grim Ambassadors of death.<br/>Then gan the day to turn to gloomy night,<br/>And darkness did as well enclose the quick<br/>As those that were but newly reft of life.<br/>No leisure served for friends to bid farewell;<br/>And, if it had, the hideous noise was such,<br/>As each to other seemed deaf and dumb.<br/>Purple the Sea, whose channel filled as fast<br/>With streaming gore, that from the maimed fell,<br/>As did her gushing moisture break into<br/>The crannied cleftures of the through shot planks.<br/>Here flew a head, dissevered from the trunk,<br/>There mangled arms and legs were tossed aloft,<br/>As when a whirl wind takes the Summer dust<br/>And scatters it in middle of the air.<br/>Then might ye see the reeling vessels split,<br/>And tottering sink into the ruthless flood,<br/>Until their lofty tops were seen no more.<br/>All shifts were tried, both for defence and hurt:<br/>And now the effect of valor and of force,<br/>Of resolution and of cowardice,<br/>We lively pictures; how the one for fame,<br/>The other by compulsion laid about;<br/>Much did the Nonpareille, that brave ship;<br/>So did the black snake of Bullen, then which<br/>A bonnier vessel never yet spread sail.<br/>But all in vain; both Sun, the Wind and tide,<br/>Revolted all unto our foe men’s side,<br/>That we perforce were fain to give them way,<br/>And they are landed.⁠—Thus my tale is done:<br/>We have untimely lost, and they have won.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td><td>Then rests there nothing, but with present speed<br/>To join our several forces all in one,<br/>And bid them battle, ere they range too far.<br/>Come, gentle Phillip, let us hence depart;<br/>This soldier’s words have pierced thy father’s heart.<br/></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
			<p><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></p>
		</section>
	</section>
	</body>
</html>
