<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act 3, Scene 2</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-3" epub:type="part">
	    <section id="act-3-scene-2" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
	      <h3 epub:type="title">Act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>
	        <span epub:type="subtitle">Scene <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></span></h3>
					<p>Picardy. Fields near Cressy.</p>
					<table>
						<tbody>
							<tr>
								<td/>
								<td>
		<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">two French men</b>; a <b epub:type="z3998:persona">woman</b><br/>and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">two Children</b> laden with household-stuff<br/>as removing.</i></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">One</td><td>Well met, my masters: how now? what’s the news?<br/>And wherefore are ye laden thus with stuff?<br/>What, is it quarter day that you remove,<br/>And carry bag and baggage too?</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Two</td><td>Quarter day? Aye, and quartering day, I fear:<br/>Have ye not heard the news that flies abroad?</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">One</td><td>What news?</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Three</td><td>How the French Navy is destroyed at Sea,<br/>And that the English Army is arrived.</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">One</td><td>What then?</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Two</td><td>What then, quoth you? why, ist not time to fly,<br/>When envy and destruction is so nigh?</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">One</td><td>Content thee, man; they are far enough from hence,<br/>And will be met, I warrant ye, to their cost,<br/>Before they break so far into the Realm.</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Two</td><td>Aye, so the Grasshopper doth spend the time<br/>In mirthful jollity, till Winter come;<br/>And then too late he would redeem his time,<br/>When frozen cold hath nipped his careless head.<br/>He, that no sooner will provide a Cloak,<br/>Then when he sees it doth begin to reign,<br/>May, peradventure, for his negligence,<br/>Be throughly washed, when he suspects it not.<br/>We that have charge and such a train as this,<br/>Must look in time to look for them and us,<br/>Least, when we would, we cannot be relieved.</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">One</td><td>Belike, you then despair of all success,<br/>And think your Country will be subjugate.</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Three</td><td>We cannot tell; tis good to fear the worst.</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">One</td><td>Yet rather fight, then, like unnatural sons,<br/>Forsake your loving parents in distress.</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Two</td><td>Tush, they that have already taken arms<br/>Are many fearful millions in respect<br/>Of that small handful of our enemies;<br/>But tis a rightful quarrel must prevail;<br/>Edward is son unto our late king’s sister,<br/>When John Valois is three degrees removed.</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Woman</td><td>Besides, there goes a Prophesy abroad,<br/>Published by one that was a Friar once,<br/>Whose Oracles have many times proved true;<br/>And now he says, the time will shortly come,<br/>When as a Lyon, roused in the west,<br/>Shall carry hence the fluerdeluce of France:<br/>These, I can tell ye, and such like surmises<br/>Strike many French men cold unto the heart.<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter a <b epub:type="z3998:persona">French man</b>.</i></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Four</td><td>Fly, country men and citizens of France!<br/>Sweet flowering peace, the root of happy life,<br/>Is quite abandoned and expulst the land;<br/>In stead of whom ransacked constraining war<br/>Sits like to Ravens upon your houses’ tops;<br/>Slaughter and mischief walk within your streets,<br/>And, unrestrained, make havoc as they pass;<br/>The form whereof even now my self beheld<br/>Upon this fair mountain whence I came.<br/>For so far of as I directed mine eyes,<br/>I might perceive five Cities all on fire,<br/>Corn fields and vineyards, burning like an oven;<br/>And, as the reaking vapour in the wind<br/>Turned but aside, I like wise might discern<br/>The poor inhabitants, escaped the flame,<br/>Fall numberless upon the soldiers’ pikes.<br/>Three ways these dreadful ministers of wrath<br/>Do tread the measures of their tragic march:<br/>Upon the right hand comes the conquering King,<br/>Upon the left his hot unbridled son,<br/>And in the midst our nation’s glittering host,<br/>All which, though distant yet, conspire in one,<br/>To leave a desolation where they come.<br/>Fly therefore, Citizens, if you be wise,<br/>Seek out some habitation further off:<br/>Here is you stay, your wives will be abused,<br/>Your treasure shared before your weeping eyes;<br/>Shelter you your selves, for now the storm doth rise.<br/>Away, away; me thinks I hear their drums:⁠—<br/>Ah, wretched France, I greatly fear thy fall;<br/>Thy glory shaketh like a tottering wall.
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
<p><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></p>
</section>
</section>
</body>
</html>
