<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act 1, Scene 2</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="act-1-scene-2" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>
	        <span epub:type="subtitle">Scene <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></span>
				</h3>
				<p>Roxborough. Before the Castle.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess of Salisbury</b>, and certain of her People, upon the walls.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td>
						<td>Alas, how much in vain my poor eyes gaze<br/>For succour that my sovereign should send!<br/>Ah, cousin Mountague, I fear, thou want’st<br/>The lively spirit sharply to solicit<br/>With vehement suit the king in my behalf:<br/>Thou dost not tell him, what a grief it is<br/>To be the scornful captive of a Scot;<br/>Either to be woo’d with broad untuned oaths,<br/>Or forc’d by rough insulting barbarism:<br/>Thou dost not tell him, if he here prevail,<br/>How much they will deride us in the North;<br/>And, in their wild, uncivil, skipping jigs,<br/>Bray forth their conquest and our overthrow,<br/>Even in the barren, bleak, and fruitless air.<br/><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter King David and Forces; with Douglas, Lorrain, and others.</i><br/>I must withdraw; the everlasting foe<br/>Comes to the wall: I’ll closely step aside,<br/>And list their babble, blunt and full of pride.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King David</td><td>My Lord of Lorrain, to our brother of France<br/>Commend us, as the man in Christendom<br/>Whom we most reverence and entirely love.<br/>Touching your embassage, return and say,<br/>That we with England will not enter parley<br/>Nor never make fair weather or take truce,<br/>But burn their neighbour towns, and so persist<br/>With eager roads beyond their city York.<br/>And never shall our bonny riders rest,<br/>Nor rusting canker have the time to eat<br/>Their light-borne snaffles nor their nimble spurs;<br/>Nor lay aside their jacks of gymold mail;<br/>Nor hang their staves of grained Scottish ash<br/>In peaceful wise upon their city walls;<br/>Nor from their button’d tawny leathern belts<br/>Dismiss their biting whinyards, till your king<br/>Cry out, Enough; spare England now for pity.<br/>Farewell, and tell him, that you leave us here<br/>Before this Castle; say, you came from us<br/>Even when we had that yielded to our hands.<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lorrain</td>
						<td>I take my leave, and fairly will return<br/>Your acceptable greeting to my king.<br/><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit Lorrain.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King David</td>
						<td>Now, Douglas, to our former task again,<br/>For the division of this certain spoil.<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Douglas</td><td>My liege, I crave the Lady, and no more.<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King David</td><td>Nay, soft ye, sir; first I must make my choice,<br/>And first I do bespeak her for my self.<br/></td>
					</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Douglas</td><td>Why then, my liege, let me enjoy her jewels.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King David</td><td>Those are her own, still liable to her,<br/>And who inherits her, hath those with all.<br/><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter a Scot in haste.</i></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td><td>My liege, as we were pricking on the hills,<br/>To fetch in booty, marching hitherward,<br/>We might descry a might host of men;<br/>The Sun, reflecting on the armour, shewed<br/>A field of plate, a wood of picks advanced.<br/>Bethink your highness speedily herein:<br/>An easy march within four hours will bring<br/>The hindmost rank unto this place, my liege.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King David</td><td>Dislodge, dislodge! it is the king of England.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Douglas</td><td>Jemmy, my man, saddle my bonny black.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King David</td><td>Meanst thou to fight, Douglas? we are too weak.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Douglas</td><td>I know it well, my liege, and therefore fly.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td><td>My Lords of Scotland, will ye stay and drink?<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King David</td><td>She mocks at us, Douglas; I cannot endure it.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td><td>Say, good my Lord, which is he must have the Lady,<br/>And which her jewels? I am sure, my Lords,<br/>Ye will not hence, till you have shared the spoils.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King David</td><td>She heard the messenger, and heard our talk;<br/>And now that comfort makes her scorn at us.<br/><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Another messenger.</i></td>
			<p id="id00122" style="margin-top: 2em">Messenger.<br/>Arm, my good Lord! O, we are all surprised!<br/></p>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td><td>After the French ambassador, my liege,<br/>And tell him, that you dare not ride to York;<br/>Excuse it that your bonny horse is lame.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King David</td><td>She heard that too; intolerable grief!<br/>Woman, farewell! Although I do not stay … <br/><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt Scots.</i></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td><td>Tis not for fear, and yet you run away.⁠—<br/>O happy comfort, welcome to our house!<br/>The confident and boisterous boasting Scot,<br/>That swore before my walls they would not back<br/>For all the armed power of this land,<br/>With faceless fear that ever turns his back,<br/>Turned hence against the blasting North-east wind<br/>Upon the bare report and name of Arms.<br/><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter Mountague.</i></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">O Summer’s day! See where my Cousin comes!</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mountague</td><td>How fares my Aunt? We are not Scots;<br/>Why do you shut your gates against your friends?<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td><td>Well may I give a welcome, Cousin, to thee,<br/>For thou comst well to chase my foes from hence.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mountague</td><td>The king himself is come in person hither;<br/>Dear Aunt, descend, and gratulate his highness.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td><td>How may I entertain his Majesty,<br/>To shew my duty and his dignity?<br/>	<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit, from above.</i></td>
			<p id="id00134" style="margin-top: 2em">[Enter King Edward, Warwick, Artois, with others.]</p>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>What, are the stealing Foxes fled and gone,<br/>Before we could uncouple at their heels?<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td><td>They are, my liege; but, with a cheerful cry,<br/>Hot hounds and hardy chase them at the heels.<br/><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter Countess.</i></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>This is the Countess, Warwick, is it not?<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td><td>Even she, my liege; whose beauty tyrants fear,<br/>As a May blossom with pernicious winds,<br/>Hath sullied, withered, overcast, and done.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Hath she been fairer, Warwick, than she is?<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td><td>My gracious King, fair is she not at all,<br/>If that her self were by to stain her self,<br/>As I have scene her when she was her self.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>What strange enchantment lurked in those her eyes,<br/>When they excelled this excellence they have,<br/>That now her dim decline hath power to draw<br/>My subject eyes from persing majesty,<br/>To gaze on her with doting admiration?<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td><td>In duty lower than the ground I kneel,<br/>And for my dull knees bow my feeling heart,<br/>To witness my obedience to your highness,<br/>With many millions of a subject’s thanks<br/>For this your Royal presence, whose approach<br/>Hath driven war and danger from my gate.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Lady, stand up; I come to bring thee peace,<br/>How ever thereby I have purchased war.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td><td>No war to you, my liege; the Scots are gone,<br/>And gallop home toward Scotland with their hate.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Least, yielding here, I pine in shameful love,<br/>Come, we’ll pursue the Scots;⁠—Artois, away!<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td><td>A little while, my gracious sovereign, stay,<br/>And let the power of a mighty king<br/>Honor our roof; my husband in the wars,<br/>When he shall hear it, will triumph for joy;<br/>Then, dear my liege, now niggard not thy state:<br/>Being at the wall, enter our homely gate.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Pardon me, countess, I will come no near;<br/>I dreamed to night of treason, and I fear.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td><td>Far from this place let ugly treason lie!<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>No farther off, than her conspiring eye,<br/>Which shoots infected poison in my heart,<br/>Beyond repulse of wit or cure of Art.<br/>Now, in the Sun alone it doth not lie,<br/>With light to take light from a mortal eye;<br/>For here two day stars that mine eyes would see<br/>More than the Sun steals mine own light from me,<br/>Contemplative desire, desire to be<br/>In contemplation, that may master thee!<br/>Warwick, Artois, to horse and let’s away!<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td><td>What might I speak to make my sovereign stay?<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>What needs a tongue to such a speaking eye,<br/>That more persuades than winning Oratory?<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td><td>Let not thy presence, like the April sun,<br/>Flatter our earth and suddenly be done.<br/>More happy do not make our outward wall<br/>Than thou wilt grace our inner house withal.<br/>Our house, my liege, is like a Country swain,<br/>Whose habit rude and manners blunt and plain<br/>Presageth nought, yet inly beautified<br/>With bounties, riches and faire hidden pride.<br/>For where the golden Ore doth buried lie,<br/>The ground, undecked with nature’s tapestry,<br/>Seems barren, sere, unfertile, fructless, dry;<br/>And where the upper turf of earth doth boast<br/>His pied perfumes and party coloured coat,<br/>Delve there, and find this issue and their pride<br/>To spring from ordure and corruption’s side.<br/>But, to make up my all too long compare,<br/>These ragged walls no testimony are,<br/>What is within; but, like a cloak, doth hide<br/>&gt;From weather’s Waste the under garnished pride.<br/>More gracious then my terms can let thee be,<br/>Intreat thy self to stay a while with me.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>As wise, as fair; what fond fit can be heard,<br/>When wisdom keeps the gate as beauty’s guard?⁠—<br/>It shall attend, while I attend on thee:<br/>Come on, my Lords; here will I host to night.<br/></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
			<p><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></p>
		</section>
	</section>
	</body>
</html>
