<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act 4, Scene 7</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-4" epub:type="part">
	    <section id="act-4-scene-7" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
	      <h3 epub:type="title">Act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>
	        <span epub:type="subtitle">Scene <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span></span>
				</h3>
					<p>The same. Another Part of the Field of Battle.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Alarum. Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</b>.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td><td>Our multitudes are in themselves confounded,<br/>Dismayed, and distraught; swift starting fear<br/>Hath buzzed a cold dismay through all our army,<br/>And every petty disadvantage prompts<br/>The fear possessed abject soul to fly.<br/>My self, whose spirit is steel to their dull lead,<br/>What with recalling of the prophecy,<br/>And that our native stones from English arms<br/>Rebel against us, find myself attainted<br/>With strong surprise of weak and yielding fear.<br/>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Charles</b>.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Charles</td><td>Fly, father, fly! the French do kill the French,<br/>Some that would stand let drive at some that fly;<br/>Our drums strike nothing but discouragement,<br/>Our trumpets sound dishonor and retire;<br/>The spirit of fear, that feareth nought but death,<br/>Cowardly works confusion on it self.<br/>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Phillip</b>.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phillip</td><td>Pluck out your eyes, and see not this day’s shame!<br/>An arm hath beat an army; one poor David<br/>Hath with a stone foiled twenty stout Goliahs;<br/>Some twenty naked starvelings with small flints,<br/>Hath driven back a puissant host of men,<br/>Arrayed and fenced in all accomplements.<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td><td>Mordieu, they quait at us, and kill us up;<br/>No less than forty thousand wicked elders<br/>Have forty lean slaves this day stoned to death.<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Charles</td><td>O, that I were some other countryman!<br/>This day hath set derision on the French,<br/>And all the world will blurt and scorn at us.<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td><td>What, is there no hope left?<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phillip</td><td>No hope, but death, to bury up our shame.<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td><td>Make up once more with me; the twentieth part<br/>Of those that live, are men inow to quail<br/>The feeble handful on the adverse part.<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Charles</td><td>Then charge again: if heaven be not opposed,<br/>We cannot lose the day.<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td><td>On, away!<br/>
					</td>
				</tr>
			</tbody>
			</table>
			<p><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
