<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act 4, Scene 5</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-4" epub:type="part">
	    <section id="act-4-scene-5" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
	      <h3 epub:type="title">Act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>
	        <span epub:type="subtitle">Scene <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span></span>
				</h3>
					<p>The same. The French Camp.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Charles</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td><td>A sudden darkness hath defaced the sky,<br/>The winds are crept into their caves for fear,<br/>The leaves move not, the world is hushed and still,<br/>The birds cease singing, and the wandering brooks<br/>Murmur no wonted greeting to their shores;<br/>Silence attends some wonder and expecteth<br/>That heaven should pronounce some prophesy:<br/>Where, or from whom, proceeds this silence, Charles?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Charles</td><td>Our men, with open mouths and staring eyes,<br/>Look on each other, as they did attend<br/>Each other’s words, and yet no creature speaks;<br/>A tongue-tied fear hath made a midnight hour,<br/>And speeches sleep through all the waking regions.<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td><td>But now the pompous Sun, in all his pride,<br/>Looked through his golden coach upon the world,<br/>And, on a sudden, hath he hid himself,<br/>That now the under earth is as a grave,<br/>Dark, deadly, silent, and uncomfortable.<br/><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">A clamor of ravens.</i><br/>Hark, what a deadly outery do I hear?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Charles</td><td>Here comes my brother Phillip.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td><td>All dismayed:<br/><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Phillip</b>.</i><br/>What fearful words are those thy looks presage?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phillip</td><td>A flight, a flight!<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td><td>Coward, what flight? thou liest, there needs no flight.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phillip</td><td>A flight.<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td><td>Awake thy craven powers, and tell on<br/>The substance of that very fear in deed,<br/>Which is so ghastly printed in thy face:<br/>What is the matter?<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phillip</td><td>A flight of ugly ravens<br/>Do croak and hover o’er our soldiers’ heads,<br/>And keep in triangles and cornered squares,<br/>Right as our forces are embattled;<br/>With their approach there came this sudden fog,<br/>Which now hath hid the airy floor of heaven<br/>And made at noon a night unnatural<br/>Upon the quaking and dismayed world:<br/>In brief, our soldiers have let fall their arms,<br/>And stand like metamorphosed images,<br/>Bloodless and pale, one gazing on another.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td><td>Aye, now I call to mind the prophesy,<br/>But I must give no entrance to a fear.⁠—<br/>Return, and hearten up these yielding souls:<br/>Tell them, the ravens, seeing them in arms,<br/>So many fair against a famished few,<br/>Come but to dine upon their handy work<br/>And prey upon the carrion that they kill:<br/>For when we see a horse laid down to die,<br/>Although he be not dead, the ravenous birds<br/>Sit watching the departure of his life;<br/>Even so these ravens for the carcasses<br/>Of those poor English, that are marked to die,<br/>Hover about, and, if they cry to us,<br/>Tis but for meat that we must kill for them.<br/>Away, and comfort up my soldiers,<br/>And sound the trumpets, and at once dispatch<br/>This little business of a silly fraud.<br/><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Phillip</b>.</i><br/>
						<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Another noise. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Salisbury</b> brought in by a French <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Captain</b>.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Captain</td><td>Behold, my liege, this knight and forty mo’,<br/>Of whom the better part are slain and fled,<br/>With all endeavor sought to break our ranks,<br/>And make their way to the encompassed prince:<br/>Dispose of him as please your majesty.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td><td>Go, and the next bough, soldier, that thou seest,<br/>Disgrace it with his body presently;<br/>For I do hold a tree in France too good<br/>To be the gallows of an English thief.<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Salisbury</td><td>My Lord of Normandy, I have your pass<br/>And warrant for my safety through this land.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Charles</td><td>Villiers procured it for thee, did he not?<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Salisbury</td><td>He did.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Charles</td><td>And it is current; thou shalt freely pass.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td><td>Aye, freely to the gallows to be hanged,<br/>Without denial or impediment.<br/>Away with him!<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Charles</td><td>I hope your highness will not so disgrace me,<br/>And dash the virtue of my seal at arms:<br/>He hath my never broken name to shew,<br/>Charactered with this princely hand of mine:<br/>And rather let me leave to be a prince<br/>Than break the stable verdict of a prince:<br/>I do beseech you, let him pass in quiet.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td><td>Thou and thy word lie both in my command;<br/>What canst thou promise that I cannot break?<br/>Which of these twain is greater infamy,<br/>To disobey thy father or thy self?<br/>Thy word, nor no mans, may exceed his power;<br/>Nor that same man doth never break his word,<br/>That keeps it to the utmost of his power.<br/>The breach of faith dwells in the soul’s consent:<br/>Which if thy self without consent do break,<br/>Thou art not charged with the breach of faith.<br/>Go, hang him: for thy license lies in me,<br/>And my constraint stands the excuse for thee.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Charles</td><td>What, am I not a soldier in my word?<br/>Then, arms, adieu, and let them fight that list!<br/>Shall I not give my girdle from my waste,<br/>But with a gardion I shall be controlled,<br/>To say I may not give my things away?<br/>Upon my soul, had Edward, prince of Wales,<br/>Engaged his word, writ down his noble hand<br/>For all your knights to pass his father’s land,<br/>The royal king, to grace his warlike son,<br/>Would not alone safe conduct give to them,<br/>But with all bounty feasted them and theirs.<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td><td>Dwelst thou on precedents? Then be it so!<br/>Say, Englishman, of what degree thou art.<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Salisbury</td><td>An Earl in England, though a prisoner here,<br/>And those that know me, call me Salisbury.<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td><td>Then, Salisbury, say whether thou art bound.<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Salisbury</td><td>To Callice, where my liege, king Edward, is.<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td><td>To Callice, Salisbury? Then, to Callice pack,<br/>And bid the king prepare a noble grave,<br/>To put his princely son, black Edward, in.<br/>And as thou travelst westward from this place,<br/>Some two leagues hence there is a lofty hill,<br/>Whose top seems topless, for the embracing sky<br/>Doth hide his high head in her azure bosom;<br/>Upon whose tall top when thy foot attains,<br/>Look back upon the humble vale beneath⁠—<br/>Humble of late, but now made proud with arms⁠—<br/>And thence behold the wretched prince of Wales,<br/>Hooped with a bond of iron round about.<br/>After which sight, to Callice spur amain,<br/>And say, the prince was smothered and not slain:<br/>And tell the king this is not all his ill;<br/>For I will greet him, ere he thinks I will.<br/>Away, be gone; the smoke but of our shot<br/>Will choke our foes, though bullets hit them not.<br/>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
			<p><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
