<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act 3, Scene 3</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-3" epub:type="part">
	    <section id="act-3-scene-3" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
	      <h3 epub:type="title">Act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>
	        <span epub:type="subtitle">Scene <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span></span></h3>
					<p>The Same.</p>
					<table>
						<tbody>
							<tr>
								<td/>
								<td>
<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</b>, and the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Earl of Darby</b>, With<br/><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Soldiers</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gobin de Grey</b>.</i></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Where’s the French man by whose cunning guide<br/>We found the shallow of this River Somme,<br/>And had directions how to pass the sea?<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gobin</td><td>Here, my good Lord.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>How art thou called? tell me thy name.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gobin</td><td>Gobin de Graie, if please your excellence.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Then, Gobin, for the service thou hast done,<br/>We here enlarge and give thee liberty;<br/>And, for recompense beside this good,<br/>Thou shalt receive five hundred marks in gold.⁠—<br/>I know not how, we should have met our son,<br/>Whom now in heart I wish I might behold.<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Artois</b>.</i></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Artois</td><td>Good news, my Lord; the prince is hard at hand,<br/>And with him comes Lord Awdley and the rest,<br/>Whom since our landing we could never meet.<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Awdley</b>, and Soldiers.</i></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Welcome, fair Prince! How hast thou sped, my son,<br/>Since thy arrival on the coast of France?<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</td><td>Successfully, I thank the gracious heavens:<br/>Some of their strongest Cities we have won,<br/>As Harflew, Lo, Crotay, and Carentigne,<br/>And others wasted, leaving at our heels<br/>A wide apparent field and beaten path<br/>For solitariness to progress in:<br/>Yet those that would submit we kindly pardoned,<br/>But who in scorn refused our proffered peace,<br/>Endured the penalty of sharp revenge.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Ah, France, why shouldest thou be thus obstinate<br/>Against the kind embracement of thy friends?<br/>How gently had we thought to touch thy breast<br/>And set our foot upon thy tender mould,<br/>But that, in froward and disdainful pride,<br/>Thou, like a skittish and untamed colt,<br/>Dost start aside and strike us with thy heels!<br/>But tell me, Ned, in all thy warlike course,<br/>Hast thou not seen the usurping King of France?<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</td><td>Yes, my good Lord, and not two hours ago,<br/>With full a hundred thousand fighting men⁠—<br/>Upon the one side of the river’s bank<br/>And on the other both, his multitudes.<br/>I feared he would have cropped our smaller power:<br/>But happily, perceiving your approach,<br/>He hath with drawn himself to Cressey plains;<br/>Where, as it seemeth by his good array,<br/>He means to bid us battle presently.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>He shall be welcome; that’s the thing we crave.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td><td>Edward, know that John, the true king of France,<br/>Musing thou shouldst encroach upon his land,<br/>And in thy tyranous proceeding slay<br/>His faithful subjects and subvert his Towns,<br/>Spits in thy face; and in this manner following<br/>Obraids thee with thine arrogant intrusion:<br/>First, I condemn thee for a fugitive,<br/>A thievish pirate, and a needy mate,<br/>One that hath either no abiding place,<br/>Or else, inhabiting some barren soil,<br/>Where neither herb or fruitful grain is had,<br/>Doest altogether live by pilfering:<br/>Next, insomuch thou hast infringed thy faith,<br/>Broke leage and solemn covenant made with me,<br/>I hold thee for a false pernicious wretch:<br/>And, last of all, although I scorn to cope<br/>With one so much inferior to my self,<br/>Yet, in respect thy thirst is all for gold,<br/>Thy labour rather to be feared than loved,<br/>To satisfy thy lust in either part,<br/>Here am I come, and with me have I brought<br/>Exceeding store of treasure, pearl, and coin.<br/>Leave, therefore, now to persecute the weak,<br/>And armed entering conflict with the armed,<br/>Let it be seen, mongest other petty thefts,<br/>How thou canst win this pillage manfully.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>If gall or wormwood have a pleasant taste,<br/>Then is thy salutation honey sweet;<br/>But as the one hath no such property,<br/>So is the other most satirical.<br/>Yet wot how I regard thy worthless taunts:<br/>If thou have uttered them to foil my fame<br/>Or dim the reputation of my birth,<br/>Know that thy wolvish barking cannot hurt;<br/>If slyly to insinuate with the world,<br/>And with a strumpet’s artificial line<br/>To paint thy vicious and deformed cause,<br/>Be well assured, the counterfeit will fade,<br/>And in the end thy foul defects be seen;<br/>But if thou didst it to provoke me on,<br/>As who should say I were but timorous.<br/>Or, coldly negligent, did need a spur,<br/>Bethink thy self how slack I was at sea,<br/>How since my landing I have won no towns,<br/>Entered no further but upon the coast,<br/>And there have ever since securely slept.<br/>But if I have been other wise employed,<br/>Imagine, Valois, whether I intend<br/>To skirmish, not for pillage, but for the Crown<br/>Which thou dost wear; and that I vow to have,<br/>Or one of us shall fall into his grave.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</td><td>Look not for cross invectives at our hands,<br/>Or railing execrations of despite:<br/>Let creeping serpents, hid in hollow banks,<br/>Sting with their tongues; we have remorseless swords,<br/>And they shall plead for us and our affairs.<br/>Yet thus much, briefly, by my father’s leave:<br/>As all the immodest poison of thy throat<br/>Is scandalous and most notorious lies,<br/>And our pretended quarrel is truly just,<br/>So end the battle when we meet to day:<br/>May either of us prosper and prevail,<br/>Or, luckless, curst, receive eternal shame!<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>That needs no further question; and I know,<br/>His conscience witnesseth, it is my right.⁠—<br/>Therefore, Valois, say, wilt thou yet resign,<br/>Before the sickles thrust into the Corn,<br/>Or that inkindled fury turn to flame?<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td><td>Edward, I know what right thou hast in France;<br/>And ere I basely will resign my Crown,<br/>This Champion field shall be a pool of blood,<br/>And all our prospect as a slaughter house.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</td><td>Aye, that approves thee, tyrant, what thou art:<br/>No father, king, or shepherd of thy realm,<br/>But one, that tears her entrails with thy hands,<br/>And, like a thirsty tyger, suckst her blood.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Audley</td><td>You peers of France, why do you follow him<br/>That is so prodigal to spend your lives?<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Charles</td><td>Whom should they follow, aged impotent,<br/>But he that is their true borne sovereign?<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Obraidst thou him, because within his face<br/>Time hath ingraved deep characters of age?<br/>Know, these grave scholars of experience,<br/>Like stiff grown oaks, will stand immovable,<br/>When whirl wind quickly turns up younger trees.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Darby</td><td>Was ever any of thy father’s house<br/>King but thyself, before this present time?<br/>Edward’s great linage, by the mother’s side,<br/>Five hundred years hath held the scepter up:<br/>Judge then, conspiratours, by this descent,<br/>Which is the true borne sovereign, this or that.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Philip</td><td>Father, range your battles, prate no more;<br/>These English fain would spend the time in words,<br/>That, night approaching, they might escape unfought.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td><td>Lords and my loving Subjects, now’s the time,<br/>That your intended force must bide the touch.<br/>Therefore, my friends, consider this in brief:<br/>He that you fight for is your natural King;<br/>He against whom you fight, a foreigner:<br/>He that you fight for, rules in clemency,<br/>And reins you with a mild and gentle bit;<br/>He against whom you fight, if he prevail,<br/>Will straight inthrone himself in tyranny,<br/>Makes slaves of you, and with a heavy hand<br/>Curtail and curb your sweetest liberty.<br/>Then, to protect your Country and your King,<br/>Let but the haughty Courage of your hearts<br/>Answer the number of your able hands,<br/>And we shall quickly chase these fugitives.<br/>For what’s this Edward but a belly god,<br/>A tender and lascivious wantoness,<br/>That thother day was almost dead for love?<br/>And what, I pray you, is his goodly guard?<br/>Such as, but scant them of their chines of beef<br/>And take away their downy featherbeds,<br/>And presently they are as resty stiff,<br/>As twere a many over ridden jades.<br/>Then, French men, scorn that such should be your Lords,<br/>And rather bind ye them in captive bands.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">All Frenchmen</td><td>Vive le Roy! God save King John of France!<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td><td>Now on this plain of Cressy spread your selves⁠—<br/>And, Edward, when thou darest, begin the fight.<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Charles</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Philip</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lorrain</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Boheme</b>, and Forces.</i></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>We presently will meet thee, John of France:⁠—<br/>And, English Lords, let us resolve this day,<br/>Either to clear us of that scandalous crime,<br/>Or be intombed in our innocence.<br/>And, Ned, because this battle is the first<br/>That ever yet thou foughtest in pitched field,<br/>As ancient custom is of Martialists,<br/>To dub thee with the tip of chivalry,<br/>In solemn manner we will give thee arms.<br/>Come, therefore, Heralds, orderly bring forth<br/>A strong attirement for the prince my son.<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter four Heralds, bringing in a coat armour, a helmet, a lance, and a shield: first Herald delivers the armour to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</b>, who puts it on his Son.</i><br/>Edward Plantagenet, in the name of God,<br/>As with this armour I impale thy breast,<br/>So be thy noble unrelenting heart<br/>Walled in with flint of matchless fortitude,<br/>That never base affections enter there:<br/>Fight and be valiant, conquer where thou comest!<br/>Now follow, Lords, and do him honor to.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Darby</td><td>Edward Plantagenet, prince of Wales,<br/>As I do set this helmet on thy head,<br/>Wherewith the chamber of thy brain is fenst,<br/>So may thy temples, with Bellona’s hand,<br/>Be still adorned with laurel victory:<br/>Fight and be valiant, conquer where thou comest!<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Audley</td><td>Edward Plantagenet, prince of Wales,<br/>Receive this lance into thy manly hand;<br/>Use it in fashion of a brazen pen,<br/>To draw forth bloody stratagems in France,<br/>And print thy valiant deeds in honor’s book:<br/>Fight and be valiant, vanquish where thou comest!<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Artois</td><td>Edward Plantagenet, prince of Wales,<br/>Hold, take this target, wear it on thy arm;<br/>And may the view thereof, like Perseus’ shield,<br/>Astonish and transform thy gazing foes<br/>To senseless images of meager death:<br/>Fight and be valiant, conquer where thou comest!<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Now wants there nought but knighthood, which deferred<br/>We leave, till thou hast won it in the field.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</td><td>My gracious father and ye forward peers,<br/>This honor you have done me, animates<br/>And cheers my green, yet scarce appearing strength<br/>With comfortable good presaging signs,<br/>No other wise than did old Jacob’s words,<br/>When as he breathed his blessings on his sons.<br/>These hallowed gifts of yours when I profane,<br/>Or use them not to glory of my God,<br/>To patronage the fatherless and poor,<br/>Or for the benefit of England’s peace,<br/>Be numb my joints, wax feeble both mine arms,<br/>Wither my heart, that, like a sapless tree,<br/>I may remain the map of infamy.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Then thus our steeled Battles shall be ranged:<br/>The leading of the vaward, Ned, is thine;<br/>To dignify whose lusty spirit the more,<br/>We temper it with Audly’s gravity,<br/>That, courage and experience joined in one,<br/>Your manage may be second unto none:<br/>For the main battles, I will guide my self;<br/>And, Darby, in the rearward march behind,<br/>That orderly disposed and set in ray,<br/>Let us to horse; and God grant us the day!<br/></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
<p><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></p>
</section>
</section>
</body>
</html>
