<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act 5, Scene 1</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-5" epub:type="part">
	    <section id="act-5-scene-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
		      <h3 epub:type="title">Act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>
		        <span epub:type="subtitle">Scene <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></span>
					</h3>
					<p>Picardy. The English Camp before Calais.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Phillip</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Derby</b>, soldiers.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>No more, Queen Phillip, pacify your self;<br/>Copland, except he can excuse his fault,<br/>Shall find displeasure written in our looks.<br/>And now unto this proud resisting town!<br/>Soldiers, assault: I will no longer stay,<br/>To be deluded by their false delays;<br/>Put all to sword, and make the spoil your own.<br/>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter six Citizens in their Shirts, bare foot, with halters about their necks.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">All</td><td>Mercy, King Edward, mercy, gracious Lord!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Contemptuous villains, call ye now for truce?<br/>Mine ears are stopped against your bootless cries:⁠—<br/>Sound, drums alarum; draw threatening swords!<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Citizen</td><td>Ah, noble Prince, take pity on this town,<br/>And hear us, mighty king:<br/>We claim the promise that your highness made;<br/>The two days’ respite is not yet expired,<br/>And we are come with willingness to bear<br/>What torturing death or punishment you please,<br/>So that the trembling multitude be saved.<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>My promise? Well, I do confess as much:<br/>But I do require the chiefest Citizens<br/>And men of most account that should submit;<br/>You, peradventure, are but servile grooms,<br/>Or some felonious robbers on the Sea,<br/>Whom, apprehended, law would execute,<br/>Albeit severity lay dead in us:<br/>No, no, ye cannot overreach us thus.<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Citizen</td><td>The Sun, dread Lord, that in the western fall<br/>Beholds us now low brought through misery,<br/>Did in the Orient purple of the morn<br/>Salute our coming forth, when we were known;<br/>Or may our portion be with damned fiends.<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>If it be so, then let our covenant stand:<br/>We take possession of the town in peace,<br/>But, for your selves, look you for no remorse;<br/>But, as imperial justice hath decreed,<br/>Your bodies shall be dragged about these walls,<br/>And after feel the stroke of quartering steel:<br/>This is your doom;⁠—go, soldiers, see it done.<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Phillip</td><td>Ah, be more mild unto these yielding men!<br/>It is a glorious thing to stablish peace,<br/>And kings approach the nearest unto God<br/>By giving life and safety unto men:<br/>As thou intendest to be king of France,<br/>So let her people live to call thee king;<br/>For what the sword cuts down or fire hath spoiled,<br/>Is held in reputation none of ours.<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Although experience teach us this is true,<br/>That peaceful quietness brings most delight,<br/>When most of all abuses are controlled;<br/>Yet, insomuch it shall be known that we<br/>As well can master our affections<br/>As conquer other by the dint of sword,<br/>Phillip, prevail; we yield to thy request:<br/>These men shall live to boast of clemency,<br/>And, tyranny, strike terror to thy self.<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Citizen</td><td>Long live your highness! happy be your reign!<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Go, get you hence, return unto the town,<br/>And if this kindness hath deserved your love,<br/>Learn then to reverence Edward as your king.⁠—<br/>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt Citizens.</i><br/>Now, might we hear of our affairs abroad,<br/>We would, till gloomy Winter were o’er spent,<br/>Dispose our men in garrison a while.<br/>But who comes here?<br/>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Copland</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King David</b>.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Derby</td><td>Copland, my Lord, and David, King of Scots.<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Is this the proud presumptuous Esquire of the North,<br/>That would not yield his prisoner to my Queen?<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Copland</td><td>I am, my liege, a Northern Esquire indeed,<br/>But neither proud nor insolent, I trust.<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>What moved thee, then, to be so obstinate<br/>To contradict our royal Queen’s desire?<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Copland</td><td>No wilful disobedience, mighty Lord,<br/>But my desert and public law at arms:<br/>I took the king my self in single fight,<br/>And, like a soldiers, would be loath to lose<br/>The least preeminence that I had won.<br/>And Copland straight upon your highness’ charge<br/>Is come to France, and with a lowly mind<br/>Doth vale the bonnet of his victory:<br/>Receive, dread Lord, the custom of my fraught,<br/>The wealthy tribute of my laboring hands,<br/>Which should long since have been surrendered up,<br/>Had but your gracious self been there in place.<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Phillip</td><td>But, Copland, thou didst scorn the king’s command,<br/>Neglecting our commission in his name.<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Copland</td><td>His name I reverence, but his person more;<br/>His name shall keep me in allegiance still,<br/>But to his person I will bend my knee.<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>I pray thee, Phillip, let displeasure pass;<br/>This man doth please me, and I like his words:<br/>For what is he that will attempt great deeds,<br/>And lose the glory that ensues the same?<br/>All rivers have recourse unto the Sea,<br/>And Copland’s faith relation to his king.<br/>Kneel, therefore, down: now rise, king Edward’s knight;<br/>And, to maintain thy state, I freely give<br/>Five hundred marks a year to thee and thine.<br/>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Salisbury</b>.</i><br/>Welcome, Lord Salisbury: what news from Brittain?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Salisbury</td><td>This, mighty king: the Country we have won,<br/>And John de Mountford, regent of that place,<br/>Presents your highness with this Coronet,<br/>Protesting true allegiance to your Grace.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>We thank thee for thy service, valiant Earl;<br/>Challenge our favour, for we owe it thee.<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Salisbury</td><td>But now, my Lord, as this is joyful news,<br/>So must my voice be tragical again,<br/>And I must sing of doleful accidents.<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>What, have our men the overthrow at Poitiers?<br/>Or is our son beset with too much odds?<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Salisbury</td><td>He was, my Lord: and as my worthless self<br/>With forty other serviceable knights,<br/>Under safe conduct of the Dauphin’s seal,<br/>Did travail that way, finding him distressed,<br/>A troop of Lances met us on the way,<br/>Surprised, and brought us prisoners to the king,<br/>Who, proud of this, and eager of revenge,<br/>Commanded straight to cut off all our heads:<br/>And surely we had died, but that the Duke,<br/>More full of honor than his angry sire,<br/>Procured our quick deliverance from thence;<br/>But, ere we went, ‘Salute your king,’ quoth he,<br/>‘Bid him provide a funeral for his son:<br/>To day our sword shall cut his thread of life;<br/>And, sooner than he thinks, we’ll be with him,<br/>To quittance those displeasures he hath done.’<br/>This said, we past, not daring to reply;<br/>Our hearts were dead, our looks diffused and wan.<br/>Wandering, at last we climed unto a hill;<br/>From whence, although our grief were much before,<br/>Yet now to see the occasion with our eyes<br/>Did thrice so much increase our heaviness:<br/>For there, my Lord, oh, there we did descry<br/>Down in a valley how both armies lay.<br/>The French had cast their trenches like a ring,<br/>And every Barricado’s open front<br/>Was thick embossed with brazen ordinance;<br/>Here stood a battaile of ten thousand horse,<br/>There twice as many pikes in quadrant wise,<br/>Here Crossbows, and deadly wounding darts:<br/>And in the midst, like to a slender point<br/>Within the compass of the horizon,<br/>As twere a rising bubble in the sea,<br/>A Hasle wand amidst a wood of Pines,<br/>Or as a bear fast chained unto a stake,<br/>Stood famous Edward, still expecting when<br/>Those dogs of France would fasten on his flesh.<br/>Anon the death procuring knell begins:<br/>Off go the Cannons, that with trembling noise<br/>Did shake the very Mountain where they stood;<br/>Then sound the Trumpets’ clangor in the air,<br/>The battles join: and, when we could no more<br/>Discern the difference twixt the friend and foe,<br/>So intricate the dark confusion was,<br/>Away we turned our watery eyes with sighs,<br/>As black as powder fuming into smoke.<br/>And thus, I fear, unhappy have I told<br/>The most untimely tale of Edward’s fall.<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Phillip</td><td>Ah me, is this my welcome into France?<br/>Is this the comfort that I looked to have,<br/>When I should meet with my beloved son?<br/>Sweet Ned, I would thy mother in the sea<br/>Had been prevented of this mortal grief!<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Content thee, Phillip; tis not tears will serve<br/>To call him back, if he be taken hence:<br/>Comfort thy self, as I do, gentle Queen,<br/>With hope of sharp, unheard of, dire revenge.⁠—<br/>He bids me to provide his funeral,<br/>And so I will; but all the Peers in France<br/>Shall mourners be, and weep out bloody tears,<br/>Until their empty veins be dry and sere:<br/>The pillars of his hearse shall be his bones;<br/>The mould that covers him, their City ashes;<br/>His knell, the groaning cries of dying men;<br/>And, in the stead of tapers on his tomb,<br/>An hundred fifty towers shall burning blaze,<br/>While we bewail our valiant son’s decease.<br/>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">After a flourish, sounded within, enter an <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Herald</b>.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Herald</td><td>Rejoice, my Lord; ascend the imperial throne!<br/>The mighty and redoubted prince of Wales,<br/>Great servitor to bloody Mars in arms,<br/>The French man’s terror, and his country’s fame,<br/>Triumphant rideth like a Roman peer,<br/>And, lowly at his stirrup, comes afoot<br/>King John of France, together with his son,<br/>In captive bonds; whose diadem he brings<br/>To crown thee with, and to proclaim thee king.<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Away with mourning, Phillip, wipe thine eyes;⁠—<br/>Sound, Trumpets, welcome in Plantagenet!<br/>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">king John</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Phillip</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Audley</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Artois</b>.</i><br/>As things long lost, when they are found again,<br/>So doth my son rejoice his father’s heart,<br/>For whom even now my soul was much perplexed.<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Phillip</td><td>Be this a token to express my joy,<br/>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Kisses him.</i><br/>For inward passion will not let me speak.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</td><td>My gracious father, here receive the gift.<br/>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Presenting him with King John’s crown.</i><br/>This wreath of conquest and reward of war,<br/>Got with as mickle peril of our lives,<br/>As ere was thing of price before this day;<br/>Install your highness in your proper right:<br/>And, herewithall, I render to your hands<br/>These prisoners, chief occasion of our strife.<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>So, John of France, I see you keep your word:<br/>You promised to be sooner with our self<br/>Than we did think for, and tis so in deed:<br/>But, had you done at first as now you do,<br/>How many civil towns had stood untouched,<br/>That now are turned to ragged heaps of stones!<br/>How many people’s lives mightst thou have saved,<br/>That are untimely sunk into their graves!<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td><td>Edward, recount not things irrevocable;<br/>Tell me what ransom thou requirest to have.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Thy ransom, John, hereafter shall be known:<br/>But first to England thou must cross the seas,<br/>To see what entertainment it affords;<br/>How ere it falls, it cannot be so bad,<br/>As ours hath been since we arrived in France.<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td><td>Accursed man! of this I was foretold,<br/>But did misconster what the prophet told.<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</td><td>Now, father, this petition Edward makes<br/>To thee, whose grace hath been his strongest shield,<br/>That, as thy pleasure chose me for the man<br/>To be the instrument to show thy power,<br/>So thou wilt grant that many princes more,<br/>Bred and brought up within that little Isle,<br/>May still be famous for like victories!<br/>And, for my part, the bloody scars I bear,<br/>And weary nights that I have watched in field,<br/>The dangerous conflicts I have often had,<br/>The fearful menaces were proffered me,<br/>The heat and cold and what else might displease:<br/>I wish were now redoubled twenty fold,<br/>So that hereafter ages, when they read<br/>The painful traffic of my tender youth,<br/>Might thereby be inflamed with such resolve,<br/>As not the territories of France alone,<br/>But likewise Spain, Turkey, and what countries else<br/>That justly would provoke fair England’s ire,<br/>Might, at their presence, tremble and retire.<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Here, English Lords, we do proclaim a rest,<br/>An intercession of our painful arms:<br/>Sheath up your swords, refresh your weary limbs,<br/>Peruse your spoils; and, after we have breathed<br/>A day or two within this haven town,<br/>God willing, then for England we’ll be shipped;<br/>Where, in a happy hour, I trust, we shall<br/>Arrive, three kings, two princes, and a queen.<br/></td>
				</tr>
			</tbody>
		</table>
		</section>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
