<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act 4, Scene 1</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-4" epub:type="part">
	    <section id="act-4-scene-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
	      <h3 epub:type="title">Act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>
	        <span epub:type="subtitle">Scene <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></span></h3>
					<p>Bretagne. Camp of the English.</p>
					<table>
						<tbody>
							<tr>
								<td/>
								<td>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Mountford</b> with a Coronet in his hand; with him the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Earl of Salisbury</b>.</i></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mountford</td><td>My Lord of Salisbury, since by your aide<br/>Mine enemy Sir Charles of Blois is slain,<br/>And I again am quietly possessed<br/>In Brittain’s Dukedom, know that I resolve,<br/>For this kind furtherance of your king and you,<br/>To swear allegiance to his majesty:<br/>In sign whereof receive this Coronet,<br/>Bear it unto him, and, withal, mine oath,<br/>Never to be but Edward’s faithful friend.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Salisbury</td><td>I take it, Mountfort. Thus, I hope, ere long<br/>The whole Dominions of the Realm of France<br/>Will be surrendered to his conquering hand.<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Mountford</b>.</i><br/>Now, if I knew but safely how to pass,<br/>I would at Calice gladly meet his Grace,<br/>Whether I am by letters certified<br/>That he intends to have his host removed.<br/>It shall be so, this policy will serve:⁠—<br/>Ho, whose within? Bring Villiers to me.<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Villiers</b>.</i><br/>Villiers, thou knowest, thou art my prisoner,<br/>And that I might for ransom, if I would,<br/>Require of thee a hundred thousand Francs,<br/>Or else retain and keep thee captive still:<br/>But so it is, that for a smaller charge<br/>Thou maist be quit, and if thou wilt thy self.<br/>And this it is: Procure me but a passport<br/>Of Charles, the Duke of Normandy, that I<br/>Without restraint may have recourse to Callis<br/>Through all the Countries where he hath to do;<br/>Which thou maist easily obtain, I think,<br/>By reason I have often heard thee say,<br/>He and thou were students once together:<br/>And then thou shalt be set at liberty.<br/>How saiest thou? wilt thou undertake to do it?<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Villiers</td><td>I will, my Lord; but I must speak with him.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Salisbury</td><td>Why, so thou shalt; take Horse, and post from hence:<br/>Only before thou goest, swear by thy faith,<br/>That, if thou canst not compass my desire,<br/>Thou wilt return my prisoner back again;<br/>And that shall be sufficient warrant for me.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Villiers</td><td>To that condition I agree, my Lord,<br/>And will unfainedly perform the same.<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Salisbury</td><td>Farewell, Villiers.⁠—<br/>Thus once i mean to try a French man’s faith.<br/>
</td>
</tr>
	</tbody>
	</table>
			<p><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
