<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act 2, Scene 2</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="act-2-scene-2" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>
	        <span epub:type="subtitle">Scene <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></span></h3>
			<p>The Same. A Room in the Castle.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Derby</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Audley</b>, meeting.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Derby</td><td>Thrice noble Audley, well encountered here!<br/>How is it with our sovereign and his peers?<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Audley</td><td>Tis full a fortnight, since I saw his highness<br/>What time he sent me forth to muster men;<br/>Which I accordingly have done, and bring them hither<br/>In fair array before his majesty.<br/>What news, my Lord of Derby, from the Emperor?</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Derby</td><td>As good as we desire: the Emperor<br/>Hath yielded to his highness friendly aid,<br/>And makes our king lieutenant general<br/>In all his lands and large dominions;<br/>Then via for the spatious bounds of France!<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Audley</td><td>What, doth his highness leap to hear these news?</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Derby</td><td>I have not yet found time to open them;<br/>The king is in his closet, malcontent;<br/>For what, I know not, but he gave in charge,<br/>Till after dinner none should interrupt him:<br/>The Countess Salisbury and her father Warwick,<br/>Artois and all look underneath the brows.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Audley</td><td>Undoubtedly, then, some thing is amiss.<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Trumpet within.</i></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Derby</td><td>The Trumpets sound, the king is now abroad.<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King</b>.</i></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Audley</td><td>Here comes his highness.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Derby</td><td>Befall my sovereign all my sovereign’s wish!</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Ah, that thou wert a Witch to make it so!<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Derby</td><td>The Emperour greeteth you.<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Presenting Letters.</i></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>—Would it were the Countess!<br/></td>
</tr>
<tr>
				<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Derby.</td><td>And hath accorded to your highness suite.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>—Thou liest, she hath not; but I would she had.</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Audley</td><td>All love and duty to my Lord the King!</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Well, all but one is none.⁠—What news with you?</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Audley</td><td>I have, my liege, levied those horse and foot<br/>According to your charge, and brought them hither.</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Then let those foot trudge hence upon those horse<br/>According to our discharge, and be gone.⁠—<br/>Darby, I’ll look upon the Countess’ mind anon.</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Derby</td><td>The Countess’ mind, my liege?<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>I mean the Emperour:⁠—leave me alone.</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Audley</td><td>What is his mind?<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Derby</td><td>Let’s leave him to his humor.<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Thus from the heart’s aboundance speaks the tongue;<br/>Countess for Emperour: and indeed, why not?<br/>She is as imperator over me<br/>And I to her<br/>Am as a kneeling vassal, that observes<br/>The pleasure or displeasure of her eye.<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodowick</b>.</i><br/>What says the more than Cleopatra’s match<br/>To Caesar now?</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodowick</td><td>That yet, my liege, ere night<br/>She will resolve your majesty.<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Drum within.</i></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>What drum is this that thunders forth this march,<br/>To start the tender Cupid in my bosom?<br/>Poor shipskin, how it brawls with him that beateth it!<br/>Go, break the thundring parchment bottom out,<br/>And I will teach it to conduct sweet lines<br/>Unto the bosom of a heavenly Nymph;<br/>For I will use it as my writing paper,<br/>And so reduce him from a scolding drum<br/>To be the herald and dear counsel bearer<br/>Betwixt a goddess and a mighty king.<br/>Go, bid the drummer learn to touch the Lute,<br/>Or hang him in the braces of his drum,<br/>For now we think it an uncivil thing,<br/>To trouble heaven with such harsh resounds:<br/>Away!<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i><br/>The quarrel that I have requires no arms<br/>But these of mine: and these shall meet my foe<br/>In a deep march of penetrable groans;<br/>My eyes shall be my arrows, and my sighs<br/>Shall serve me as the vantage of the wind,<br/>To whirl away my sweetest artillery.<br/>Ah, but, alas, she wins the sun of me,<br/>For that is she her self, and thence it comes<br/>That Poets term the wanton warrior blind;<br/>But love hath eyes as judgement to his steps,<br/>Till too much loved glory dazzles them.⁠—<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodowick</b>.</i><br/>How now?</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodowick</td><td>My liege, the drum that stroke the lusty march,<br/>Stands with Prince Edward, your thrice valiant son.<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</b>.</i></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>I see the boy; oh, how his mother’s face,<br/>Modeled in his, corrects my strayed desire,<br/>And rates my heart, and chides my thievish eye,<br/>Who, being rich enough in seeing her,<br/>Yet seeks elsewhere: and basest theft is that<br/>Which cannot cloak it self on poverty.⁠—<br/>Now, boy, what news?<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</td><td>I have assembled, my dear Lord and father,<br/>The choicest buds of all our English blood<br/>For our affairs in France; and here we come<br/>To take direction from your majesty.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Still do I see in him delineate<br/>His mother’s visage; those his eyes are hers,<br/>Who, looking wistely on me, make me blush:<br/>For faults against themselves give evidence;<br/>Lust is fire, and men like lanthornes show<br/>Light lust within them selves, even through them selves.<br/>Away, loose silks of wavering vanity!<br/>Shall the large limit of fair Brittain<br/>By me be overthrown, and shall I not<br/>Master this little mansion of my self?<br/>Give me an Armor of eternal steel!<br/>I go to conquer kings; and shall I not then<br/>Subdue my self? and be my enemy’s friend?<br/>It must not be.⁠—Come, boy, forward, advance!<br/>Let’s with our colours sweet the Air of France.<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodowick</b>.</i></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodowick</td><td>My liege, the Countess with a smiling cheer<br/>Desires access unto your Majesty.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Why, there it goes! That very smile of hers<br/>Hath ransomed captive France, and set the King,<br/>The Dauphin, and the Peers at liberty.⁠—<br/>Go, leave me, Ned, and revel with thy friends.<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</b>.</i><br/>Thy mother is but black, and thou, like her,<br/>Dost put it in my mind how foul she is.⁠—<br/>Go, fetch the Countess hither in thy hand,<br/>And let her chase away these winter clouds,<br/>For she gives beauty both to heaven and earth.<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodowick</b>.</i><br/>The sin is more to hack and hew poor men,<br/>Than to embrace in an unlawful bed<br/>The register of all rarities<br/>Since Letherne Adam till this youngest hour.<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</b> escorted by <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodowick</b>.</i><br/>Go, Lodowick, put thy hand into my purse,<br/>Play, spend, give, riot, waste, do what thou wilt,<br/>So thou wilt hence awhile and leave me here.<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodowick</b>.</i><br/>Now, my soul’s playfellow, art thou come<br/>To speak the more than heavenly word of yea<br/>To my objection in thy beauteous love?<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td><td>My father on his blessing hath commanded⁠—<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>That thou shalt yield to me?<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td><td>Aye, dear my liege, your due.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>And that, my dearest love, can be no less<br/>Than right for right and tender love for love.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td><td>Then wrong for wrong and endless hate for hate.⁠—<br/>But⁠—sith I see your majesty so bent,<br/>That my unwillingness, my husband’s love,<br/>Your high estate, nor no respect respected<br/>Can be my help, but that your mightiness<br/>Will overbear and awe these dear regards⁠—<br/>I bind my discontent to my content,<br/>And what I would not I’ll compel I will,<br/>Provided that your self remove those lets<br/>That stand between your highness’ love and mine.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Name them, fair Countess, and, by heaven, I will.</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td><td>It is their lives that stand between our love,<br/>That I would have choked up, my sovereign.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Whose lives, my Lady?<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td><td>My thrice loving liege,<br/>Your Queen and Salisbury, my wedded husband,<br/>Who living have that title in our love,<br/>That we cannot bestow but by their death.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Thy opposition is beyond our Law.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td><td>So is your desire: if the law<br/>Can hinder you to execute the one,<br/>Let it forbid you to attempt the other.<br/>I cannot think you love me as you say,<br/>Unless you do make good what you have sworn.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>No more; thy husband and the Queen shall die.<br/>Fairer thou art by far than Hero was,<br/>Beardless Leander not so strong as I:<br/>He swom an easy current for his love,<br/>But I will through a Hellespont of blood,<br/>To arrive at Cestus where my Hero lies.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td><td>Nay, you’ll do more; you’ll make the River to<br/>With their heart bloods that keep our love asunder,<br/>Of which my husband and your wife are twain.<br/></td>
</tr>
<tr>
				<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward.</td><td>Thy beauty makes them guilty of their death<br/>And gives in evidence that they shall die;<br/>Upon which verdict I, their Judge, condemn them.</td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td><td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i> O perjured beauty, more corrupted Judge!<br/>When to the great Star-chamber o’er our heads<br/>The universal Sessions calls to count<br/>This packing evil, we both shall tremble for it.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>What says my fair love? is she resolute?<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td><td>Resolute to be dissolute; and, therefore, this:<br/>Keep but thy word, great king, and I am thine.<br/>Stand where thou dost, I’ll part a little from thee,<br/>And see how I will yield me to thy hands.<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Turning suddenly upon him, and shewing two Daggers.</i><br/>Here by my side doth hang my wedding knifes:<br/>Take thou the one, and with it kill thy Queen,<br/>And learn by me to find her where she lies;<br/>And with this other I’ll dispatch my love,<br/>Which now lies fast a sleep within my heart:<br/>When they are gone, then I’ll consent to love.<br/>Stir not, lascivious king, to hinder me;<br/>My resolution is more nimbler far,<br/>Than thy prevention can be in my rescue,<br/>And if thou stir, I strike; therefore, stand still,<br/>And hear the choice that I will put thee to:<br/>Either swear to leave thy most unholy suit<br/>And never hence forth to solicit me;<br/>Or else, by heaven, this sharp pointed knife<br/>Shall stain thy earth with that which thou would stain,<br/>My poor chaste blood. Swear, Edward, swear,<br/>Or I will strike and die before thee here.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Even by that power I swear, that gives me now<br/>The power to be ashamed of my self,<br/>I never mean to part my lips again<br/>In any words that tends to such a suit.<br/>Arise, true English Lady, whom our Isle<br/>May better boast of than ever Roman might<br/>Of her, whose ransacked treasury hath taskt<br/>The vain endeavor of so many pens:<br/>Arise, and be my fault thy honor’s fame,<br/>Which after ages shall enrich thee with.<br/>I am awakened from this idle dream.⁠—<br/>Warwick, my Son, Darby, Artois, and Audley!<br/>Brave warriors all, where are you all this while?<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter all.</i><br/>Warwick, I make thee Warden of the North:<br/>Thou, Prince of Wales, and Audley, straight to Sea;<br/>Scour to New-haven; some there stay for me:<br/>My self, Artois, and Darby will through Flanders,<br/>To greet our friends there and to crave their aide.<br/>This night will scarce suffice a faithful lover;<br/>For, ere the Sun shall gild the eastern sky,<br/>We’ll wake him with our Marshall harmony.<br/>
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
<p><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></p>
		</section>
	</section>
	</body>
</html>
