<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act IV, Scene IX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-4" epub:type="part">
	    <section id="act-4-scene-9" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
	      <h3 epub:type="title">Act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>
	        <span epub:type="subtitle">Scene <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span></span>
				</h3>
					<p>The same. The English Camp.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Charles</b>, and all, with Ensigns spread.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</td><td>Now, John in France, and lately John of France,<br/>Thy bloody Ensigns are my captive colours;<br/>And you, high vaunting Charles of Normandy,<br/>That once to day sent me a horse to fly,<br/>Are now the subjects of my clemency.<br/>Fie, Lords, is it not a shame that English boys,<br/>Whose early days are yet not worth a beard,<br/>Should in the bosom of your kingdom thus,<br/>One against twenty, beat you up together?<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td><td>Thy fortune, not thy force, hath conquered us.<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</td><td>An argument that heaven aides the right.<br/>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Artois</b> with <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Phillip</b>.</i><br/>See, see, Artois doth bring with him along<br/>The late good counsel giver to my soul.<br/>Welcome, Artois; and welcome, Phillip, too:<br/>Who now of you or I have need to pray?<br/>Now is the proverb verified in you,<br/>‘Too bright a morning breeds a louring day.’<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Sound Trumpets. Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Audley</b>.</i><br/>But say, what grim discouragement comes here!<br/>Alas, what thousand armed men of France<br/>Have writ that note of death in Audley’s face?<br/>Speak, thou that wooest death with thy careless smile,<br/>And lookst so merrily upon thy grave,<br/>As if thou were enamored on thine end:<br/>What hungry sword hath so bereaved thy face,<br/>And lopped a true friend from my loving soul?<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Audley</td><td>O Prince, thy sweet bemoaning speech to me<br/>Is as a mournful knell to one dead sick.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</td><td>Dear Audley, if my tongue ring out thy end,<br/>My arms shall be thy grave: what may I do<br/>To win thy life, or to revenge thy death?<br/>If thou wilt drink the blood of captive kings,<br/>Or that it were restorative, command<br/>A Health of kings’ blood, and I’ll drink to thee;<br/>If honor may dispense for thee with death,<br/>The never dying honor of this day<br/>Share wholly, Audley, to thy self, and live.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Audley</td><td>Victorious Prince⁠—that thou art so, behold<br/>A Caesar’s fame in king’s captivity⁠—<br/>If I could hold him death but at a bay,<br/>Till I did see my liege thy royal father,<br/>My soul should yield this Castle of my flesh,<br/>This mangled tribute, with all willingness,<br/>To darkness, consummation, dust, and Worms.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</td><td>Cheerily, bold man, thy soul is all too proud<br/>To yield her City for one little breach;<br/>Should be divorced from her earthly spouse<br/>By the soft temper of a French man’s sword?<br/>Lo, to repair thy life, I give to thee<br/>Three thousand Marks a year in English land.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Audley</td><td>I take thy gift, to pay the debts I owe:<br/>These two poor Esquires redeemed me from the French<br/>With lusty &amp; dear hazard of their lives:<br/>What thou hast given me, I give to them;<br/>And, as thou lovest me, prince, lay thy consent<br/>To this bequeath in my last testament.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</td><td>Renowned Audley, live, and have from me<br/>This gift twice doubled to these Esquires and thee:<br/>But live or die, what thou hast given away<br/>To these and theirs shall lasting freedom stay.<br/>Come, gentlemen, I will see my friend bestowed<br/>With in an easy Litter; then we’ll march<br/>Proudly toward Callis, with triumphant pace,<br/>Unto my royal father, and there bring<br/>The tribute of my wars, fair France his king.<br/></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
<p><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></p>
</section>
</section>
</body>
</html>
