<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act 4, Scene 3</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-4" epub:type="part">
			<section id="act-4-scene-3" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Scene <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span></span>
				</h3>
					<p>Poitou. Fields near Poitiers. The French camp; Tent of the Duke of Normandy.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Charles</b> of Normandy and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Villiers</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Charles</td><td>I wonder, Villiers, thou shouldest importune me<br/>For one that is our deadly enemy.<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Villiers</td><td>Not for his sake, my gracious Lord, so much<br/>Am I become an earnest advocate,<br/>As that thereby my ransom will be quit.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Charles</td><td>Thy ransom, man? why needest thou talk of that?<br/>Art thou not free? and are not all occasions,<br/>That happen for advantage of our foes,<br/>To be accepted of, and stood upon?</td>
			</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Villiers</td><td>No, good my Lord, except the same be just;<br/>For profit must with honor be comixt,<br/>Or else our actions are but scandalous.<br/>But, letting pass their intricate objections,<br/>Wilt please your highness to subscribe, or no?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Charles</td><td>Villiers, I will not, nor I cannot do it;<br/>Salisbury shall not have his will so much,<br/>To claim a passport how it pleaseth himself.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Villiers</td><td>Why, then I know the extremity, my Lord;<br/>I must return to prison whence I came.<br/></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Charles</td><td>Return? I hope thou wilt not;<br/>What bird that hath escaped the fowler’s gin,<br/>Will not beware how she’s ensnared again?<br/>Or, what is he, so senseless and secure,<br/>That, having hardly past a dangerous gul,<br/>Will put him self in peril there again?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Villiers</td><td>Ah, but it is mine oath, my gracious Lord,<br/>Which I in conscience may not violate,<br/>Or else a kingdom should not draw me hence.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Charles</td><td>Thine oath? why, tat doth bind thee to abide:<br/>Hast thou not sworn obedience to thy Prince?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Villiers</td><td>In all things that uprightly he commands:<br/>But either to persuade or threaten me,<br/>Not to perform the covenant of my word,<br/>Is lawless, and I need not to obey.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Charles</td><td>Why, is it lawful for a man to kill,<br/>And not, to break a promise with his foe?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Villiers</td><td>To kill, my Lord, when war is once proclaimed,<br/>So that our quarrel be for wrongs received,<br/>No doubt, is lawfully permitted us;<br/>But in an oath we must be well advised,<br/>How we do swear, and, when we once have sworn,<br/>Not to infringe it, though we die therefore:<br/>Therefore, my Lord, as willing I return,<br/>As if I were to fly to paradise.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Charles</td><td>Stay, my Villiers; thine honorable min<br/>Deserves to be eternally admired.<br/>Thy suit shall be no longer thus deferred:<br/>Give me the paper, I’ll subscribe to it;<br/>And, wheretofore I loved thee as Villiers,<br/>Hereafter I’ll embrace thee as my self.<br/>Stay, and be still in favour with thy Lord.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Villiers</td><td>I humbly thank you grace; I must dispatch,<br/>And send this passport first unto the Earl,<br/>And then I will attend your highness pleasure.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Charles</td><td>Do so, Villiers;⁠—and Charles, when he hath need,<br/>Be such his soldiers, howsoever he speed!<br/>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Villiers</b>.</i><br/>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</b>.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td><td>Come, Charles, and arm thee; Edward is entrapped,<br/>The Prince of Wales is fallen into our hands,<br/>And we have compassed him; he cannot escape.<br/></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Charles</td><td>But will your highness fight to day?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td><td>What else, my son? he’s scarce eight thousand strong,<br/>And we are threescore thousand at the least.<br/></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Charles</td><td>I have a prophecy, my gracious Lord,<br/>Wherein is written what success is like<br/>To happen us in this outrageous war;<br/>It was delivered me at Cresses field<br/>By one that is an aged Hermit there.<br/>[Reads.] ‘When feathered foul shall make thine army tremble,<br/>And flint stones rise and break the battle ray,<br/>Then think on him that doth not now dissemble;<br/>For that shall be the hapless dreadful day:<br/>Yet, in the end, thy foot thou shalt advance<br/>As far in England as thy foe in France.’</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td><td>By this it seems we shall be fortunate:<br/>For as it is impossible that stones<br/>Should ever rise and break the battle ray,<br/>Or airy foul make men in arms to quake,<br/>So is it like, we shall not be subdued:<br/>Or say this might be true, yet in the end,<br/>Since he doth promise we shall drive him hence<br/>And forage their Country as they have done ours,<br/>By this revenge that loss will seem the less.<br/>But all are frivolous fancies, toys, and dreams:<br/>Once we are sure we have ensnared the son,<br/>Catch we the father after how we can.<br/>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
			<p><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
