<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act 3, Scene 5</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-3" epub:type="part">
	    <section id="act-3-scene-5" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
	      <h3 epub:type="title">Act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Scene <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span></span></h3>
					<p>The Same.</p>
					<table>
						<tbody>
							<tr>
								<td/>
								<td>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Audley</b>.</i></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Lord Audley, whiles our son is in the chase,<br/>With draw our powers unto this little hill,<br/>And here a season let us breath our selves.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Audley</td><td>I will, my Lord.<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit. Sound Retreat.</i></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Just dooming heaven, whose secret providence<br/>To our gross judgement is inscrutable,<br/>How are we bound to praise thy wondrous works,<br/>That hast this day given way unto the right,<br/>And made the wicked stumble at them selves!<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Artois</b>.</i></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Artois</td><td>Rescue, king Edward! rescue for thy son!<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Rescue, Artois? what, is he prisoner,<br/>Or by violence fell beside his horse?<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Artois</td><td>Neither, my Lord: but narrowly beset<br/>With turning Frenchmen, whom he did pursue,<br/>As tis impossible that he should scape,<br/>Except your highness presently descend.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Tut, let him fight; we gave him arms to day,<br/>And he is laboring for a knighthood, man.<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Derby</b>.</i></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Darby</td><td>The Prince, my Lord, the Prince! oh, succour him!<br/>He’s close incompast with a world of odds!<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Then will he win a world of honor too,<br/>If he by valour can redeem him thence;<br/>If not, what remedy? we have more sons<br/>Than one, to comfort our declining age.<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Audley</b>.</i><br/>Renowned Edward, give me leave, I pray,<br/>To lead my soldiers where I may relieve<br/>Your Grace’s son, in danger to be slain.<br/>The snares of French, like Emmets on a bank,<br/>Muster about him; whilest he, Lion like,<br/>Intangled in the net of their assaults,<br/>Franticly wrends, and bites the woven toil;<br/>But all in vain, he cannot free him self.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Audley, content; I will not have a man,<br/>On pain of death, sent forth to succour him:<br/>This is the day, ordained by destiny,<br/>To season his courage with those grievous thoughts,<br/>That, if he breaketh out, Nestor’s years on earth<br/>Will make him savor still of this exploit.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Darby</td><td>Ah, but he shall not live to see those days.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Why, then his Epitaph is lasting praise.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Audley</td><td>Yet, good my Lord, tis too much willfulness,<br/>To let his blood be spilt, that may be saved.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Exclaim no more; for none of you can tell<br/>Whether a borrowed aid will serve, or no;<br/>Perhaps he is already slain or ta’en.<br/>And dare a Falcon when she’s in her flight,<br/>And ever after she’ll be haggard like:<br/>Let Edward be delivered by our hands,<br/>And still, in danger, he’ll expect the like;<br/>But if himself himself redeem from thence,<br/>He will have vanquished cheerful death and fear,<br/>And ever after dread their force no more<br/>Than if they were but babes or Captive slaves.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Audley</td><td>O cruel Father! Farewell, Edward, then!<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Darby</td><td>Farewell, sweet Prince, the hope of chivalry!<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Artois</td><td>O, would my life might ransom him from death!<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>But soft, me thinks I hear<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Retreat sounded.</i><br/>The dismal charge of Trumpets’ loud retreat.<br/>All are not slain, I hope, that went with him;<br/>Some will return with tidings, good or bad.<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</b> in triumph, bearing in his hands his chivered Lance, and the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King of Boheme</b>, borne before, wrapped in the Colours. They run and imbrace him.</i></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Audley</td><td>O joyful sight! victorious Edward lives!<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Derby</td><td>Welcome, brave Prince!<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Welcome, Plantagenet! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Embracing him.</i></td>
</tr>
<tr>
		<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward.</td><td>First having done my duty as beseemed,<br/>
			<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Kneels and kisses his father’s hand.</i><br/>Lords, I regreet you all with hearty thanks.<br/>And now, behold, after my winter’s toil,<br/>My painful voyage on the boisterous sea<br/>Of wars devouring gulfs and steely rocks,<br/>I bring my fraught unto the wished port,<br/>My Summer’s hope, my travels’ sweet reward:<br/>And here, with humble duty, I present<br/>This sacrifice, this first fruit of my sword,<br/>Cropped and cut down even at the gate of death,<br/>The king of Boheme, father, whom I slew;<br/>Whose thousands had entrenched me round about,<br/>And lay as thick upon my battered crest,<br/>As on an Anvil, with their ponderous glaves:<br/>Yet marble courage still did underprop<br/>And when my weary arms, with often blows,<br/>Like the continual laboring Wood-man’s Axe<br/>That is enjoined to fell a load of Oaks,<br/>Began to faulter, straight I would record<br/>My gifts you gave me, and my zealous vow,<br/>And then new courage made me fresh again,<br/>That, in despite, I carved my passage forth,<br/>And put the multitude to speedy flight.<br/>Lo, thus hath Edward’s hand filled your request,<br/>And done, I hope, the duty of a Knight.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Aye, well thou hast deserved a knighthood, Ned!<br/>And, therefore, with thy sword, yet reaking warm<br/>His Sword borne by a Soldier.<br/>With blood of those that fought to be thy bane.<br/>Arise, Prince Edward, trusty knight at arms:<br/>This day thou hast confounded me with joy,<br/>And proud thy self fit heir unto a king.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</td><td>Here is a note, my gracious Lord, of those<br/>That in this conflict of our foes were slain:<br/>Eleven Princes of esteem, Four score Barons,<br/>A hundred and twenty knights, and thirty thousand<br/>Common soldiers; and, of our men, a thousand.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Our God be praised! Now, John of France, I hope,<br/>Thou knowest King Edward for no wantoness,<br/>No love sick cockney, nor his soldiers jades.<br/>But which way is the fearful king escaped?<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</td><td>Towards Poitiers, noble father, and his sons.<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td><td>Ned, thou and Audley shall pursue them still;<br/>My self and Derby will to Calice straight,<br/>And there be begirt that Haven town with siege.<br/>Now lies it on an upshot; therefore strike,<br/>And wistly follow, whiles the game’s on foot.<br/>What Picture’s this?<br/></td>
			</tr>
<tr>
<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</td><td>A Pelican, my Lord,<br/>Wounding her bosom with her crooked beak,<br/>That so her nest of young ones may be fed<br/>With drops of blood that issue from her heart;<br/>The motto Sic &amp; vos, ‘and so should you.’<br/>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
			<p><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
