<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 18</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-18" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4 id="id00627" style="margin-top: 2em">Act IV. Scene IX. The same. The English Camp.</h4>
			<p id="id00628">[Enter prince Edward, King John, Charles, and all, with Ensigns spread.]</p>
			<p id="id00629">Prince Edward.<br/> Now, John in France, &amp; lately John of France,<br/> Thy bloody Ensigns are my captive colours;<br/> And you, high vaunting Charles of Normandy,<br/> That once to day sent me a horse to fly,<br/> Are now the subjects of my clemency.<br/> Fie, Lords, is it not a shame that English boys,<br/> Whose early days are yet not worth a beard,<br/> Should in the bosom of your kingdom thus,<br/> One against twenty, beat you up together?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00630">King John.<br/> Thy fortune, not thy force, hath conquered us.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00631">Prince Edward.<br/> An argument that heaven aides the right.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00632">[Enter Artois with Phillip.]</p>
			<p id="id00633">See, see, Artois doth bring with him along<br/> The late good counsel giver to my soul.<br/> Welcome, Artois; and welcome, Phillip, too:<br/> Who now of you or I have need to pray?<br/> Now is the proverb verified in you,<br/> ‘Too bright a morning breeds a louring day.’<br/></p>
			<p id="id00634">[Sound Trumpets. Enter Audley.]</p>
			<p id="id00635">But say, what grim discouragement comes here!<br/> Alas, what thousand armed men of France<br/> Have writ that note of death in Audley’s face?<br/> Speak, thou that wooest death with thy careless smile,<br/> And lookst so merrily upon thy grave,<br/> As if thou were enamored on thine end:<br/> What hungry sword hath so bereaved thy face,<br/> And lopped a true friend from my loving soul?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00636">Audley.<br/> O Prince, thy sweet bemoaning speech to me<br/> Is as a mournful knell to one dead sick.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00637">Prince Edward.<br/> Dear Audley, if my tongue ring out thy end,<br/> My arms shall be thy grave: what may I do<br/> To win thy life, or to revenge thy death?<br/> If thou wilt drink the blood of captive kings,<br/> Or that it were restorative, command<br/> A Health of kings’ blood, and I’ll drink to thee;<br/> If honor may dispense for thee with death,<br/> The never dying honor of this day<br/> Share wholly, Audley, to thy self, and live.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00638">Audley.<br/> Victorious Prince⁠—that thou art so, behold<br/> A Caesar’s fame in king’s captivity⁠—<br/> If I could hold him death but at a bay,<br/> Till I did see my liege thy royal father,<br/> My soul should yield this Castle of my flesh,<br/> This mangled tribute, with all willingness,<br/> To darkness, consummation, dust, and Worms.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00639">Prince Edward.<br/> Cheerily, bold man, thy soul is all too proud<br/> To yield her City for one little breach;<br/> Should be divorced from her earthly spouse<br/> By the soft temper of a French man’s sword?<br/> Lo, to repair thy life, I give to thee<br/> Three thousand Marks a year in English land.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00640">Audley.<br/> I take thy gift, to pay the debts I owe:<br/> These two poor Esquires redeemed me from the French<br/> With lusty &amp; dear hazard of their lives:<br/> What thou hast given me, I give to them;<br/> And, as thou lovest me, prince, lay thy consent<br/> To this bequeath in my last testament.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00641">Prince Edward.<br/> Renowned Audley, live, and have from me<br/> This gift twice doubled to these Esquires and thee:<br/> But live or die, what thou hast given away<br/> To these and theirs shall lasting freedom stay.<br/> Come, gentlemen, I will see my friend bestowed<br/> With in an easy Litter; then we’ll march<br/> Proudly toward Callis, with triumphant pace,<br/> Unto my royal father, and there bring<br/> The tribute of my wars, fair France his king.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00642">[Exit.]</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
