<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 8</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-8" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4 id="id00381" style="margin-top: 2em">Act III. Scene III. The same. Drums.</h4>
			<p id="id00382">[Enter King Edward, and the Earl of Darby, With<br/> Soldiers, and Gobin de Grey.]<br/></p>
			<p id="id00383">King Edward.<br/> Where’s the French man by whose cunning guide<br/> We found the shallow of this River Somme,<br/> And had directions how to pass the sea?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00384">Gobin.<br/> Here, my good Lord.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00385">King Edward.<br/> How art thou called? tell me thy name.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00386">Gobin.<br/> Gobin de Graie, if please your excellence.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00387">King Edward.<br/> Then, Gobin, for the service thou hast done,<br/> We here enlarge and give thee liberty;<br/> And, for recompense beside this good,<br/> Thou shalt receive five hundred marks in gold.⁠—<br/> I know not how, we should have met our son,<br/> Whom now in heart I wish I might behold.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00388">[Enter Artois.]</p>
			<p id="id00389">Artois.<br/> Good news, my Lord; the prince is hard at hand,<br/> And with him comes Lord Awdley and the rest,<br/> Whom since our landing we could never meet.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00390">[Enter Prince Edward, Lord Awdley, and Soldiers.]</p>
			<p id="id00391">King Edward.<br/> Welcome, fair Prince! How hast thou sped, my son,<br/> Since thy arrival on the coast of France?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00392">Prince Edward.<br/> Successfully, I thank the gracious heavens:<br/> Some of their strongest Cities we have won,<br/> As Harflew, Lo, Crotay, and Carentigne,<br/> And others wasted, leaving at our heels<br/> A wide apparent field and beaten path<br/> For solitariness to progress in:<br/> Yet those that would submit we kindly pardoned,<br/> But who in scorn refused our proffered peace,<br/> Endured the penalty of sharp revenge.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00393">King Edward.<br/> Ah, France, why shouldest thou be thus obstinate<br/> Against the kind embracement of thy friends?<br/> How gently had we thought to touch thy breast<br/> And set our foot upon thy tender mould,<br/> But that, in froward and disdainful pride,<br/> Thou, like a skittish and untamed colt,<br/> Dost start aside and strike us with thy heels!<br/> But tell me, Ned, in all thy warlike course,<br/> Hast thou not seen the usurping King of France?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00394">Prince Edward.<br/> Yes, my good Lord, and not two hours ago,<br/> With full a hundred thousand fighting men⁠—<br/> Upon the one side of the river’s bank<br/> And on the other both, his multitudes.<br/> I feared he would have cropped our smaller power:<br/> But happily, perceiving your approach,<br/> He hath with drawn himself to Cressey plains;<br/> Where, as it seemeth by his good array,<br/> He means to bid us battle presently.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00395">King Edward.<br/> He shall be welcome; that’s the thing we crave.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00396">[Enter King John, Dukes of Normandy and Lorrain,<br/> King of Boheme, young Phillip, and Soldiers.]<br/></p>
			<p id="id00397">King John.<br/> Edward, know that John, the true king of France,<br/> Musing thou shouldst encroach upon his land,<br/> And in thy tyranous proceeding slay<br/> His faithful subjects and subvert his Towns,<br/> Spits in thy face; and in this manner following<br/> Obraids thee with thine arrogant intrusion:<br/> First, I condemn thee for a fugitive,<br/> A thievish pirate, and a needy mate,<br/> One that hath either no abiding place,<br/> Or else, inhabiting some barren soil,<br/> Where neither herb or fruitful grain is had,<br/> Doest altogether live by pilfering:<br/> Next, insomuch thou hast infringed thy faith,<br/> Broke leage and solemn covenant made with me,<br/> I hold thee for a false pernicious wretch:<br/> And, last of all, although I scorn to cope<br/> With one so much inferior to my self,<br/> Yet, in respect thy thirst is all for gold,<br/> Thy labour rather to be feared than loved,<br/> To satisfy thy lust in either part,<br/> Here am I come, and with me have I brought<br/> Exceeding store of treasure, pearl, and coin.<br/> Leave, therefore, now to persecute the weak,<br/> And armed entering conflict with the armed,<br/> Let it be seen, mongest other petty thefts,<br/> How thou canst win this pillage manfully.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00398">King Edward.<br/> If gall or wormwood have a pleasant taste,<br/> Then is thy salutation honey sweet;<br/> But as the one hath no such property,<br/> So is the other most satirical.<br/> Yet wot how I regard thy worthless taunts:<br/> If thou have uttered them to foil my fame<br/> Or dim the reputation of my birth,<br/> Know that thy wolvish barking cannot hurt;<br/> If slyly to insinuate with the world,<br/> And with a strumpet’s artificial line<br/> To paint thy vicious and deformed cause,<br/> Be well assured, the counterfeit will fade,<br/> And in the end thy foul defects be seen;<br/> But if thou didst it to provoke me on,<br/> As who should say I were but timorous.<br/> Or, coldly negligent, did need a spur,<br/> Bethink thy self how slack I was at sea,<br/> How since my landing I have won no towns,<br/> Entered no further but upon the coast,<br/> And there have ever since securely slept.<br/> But if I have been other wise employed,<br/> Imagine, Valois, whether I intend<br/> To skirmish, not for pillage, but for the Crown<br/> Which thou dost wear; and that I vow to have,<br/> Or one of us shall fall into his grave.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00399">Prince Edward.<br/> Look not for cross invectives at our hands,<br/> Or railing execrations of despite:<br/> Let creeping serpents, hid in hollow banks,<br/> Sting with their tongues; we have remorseless swords,<br/> And they shall plead for us and our affairs.<br/> Yet thus much, briefly, by my father’s leave:<br/> As all the immodest poison of thy throat<br/> Is scandalous and most notorious lies,<br/> And our pretended quarrel is truly just,<br/> So end the battle when we meet to day:<br/> May either of us prosper and prevail,<br/> Or, luckless, curst, receive eternal shame!<br/></p>
			<p id="id00400">King Edward.<br/> That needs no further question; and I know,<br/> His conscience witnesseth, it is my right.⁠—<br/> Therefore, Valois, say, wilt thou yet resign,<br/> Before the sickles thrust into the Corn,<br/> Or that inkindled fury turn to flame?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00401">King John.<br/> Edward, I know what right thou hast in France;<br/> And ere I basely will resign my Crown,<br/> This Champion field shall be a pool of blood,<br/> And all our prospect as a slaughter house.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00402">Prince Edward.<br/> Aye, that approves thee, tyrant, what thou art:<br/> No father, king, or shepherd of thy realm,<br/> But one, that tears her entrails with thy hands,<br/> And, like a thirsty tyger, suckst her blood.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00403">Audley.<br/> You peers of France, why do you follow him<br/> That is so prodigal to spend your lives?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00404">Charles.<br/> Whom should they follow, aged impotent,<br/> But he that is their true borne sovereign?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00405">King Edward.<br/> Obraidst thou him, because within his face<br/> Time hath ingraved deep characters of age?<br/> Know, these grave scholars of experience,<br/> Like stiff grown oaks, will stand immovable,<br/> When whirl wind quickly turns up younger trees.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00406">Darby.<br/> Was ever any of thy father’s house<br/> King but thyself, before this present time?<br/> Edward’s great linage, by the mother’s side,<br/> Five hundred years hath held the scepter up:<br/> Judge then, conspiratours, by this descent,<br/> Which is the true borne sovereign, this or that.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00407">Philip.<br/> Father, range your battles, prate no more;<br/> These English fain would spend the time in words,<br/> That, night approaching, they might escape unfought.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00408">King John.<br/> Lords and my loving Subjects, now’s the time,<br/> That your intended force must bide the touch.<br/> Therefore, my friends, consider this in brief:<br/> He that you fight for is your natural King;<br/> He against whom you fight, a foreigner:<br/> He that you fight for, rules in clemency,<br/> And reins you with a mild and gentle bit;<br/> He against whom you fight, if he prevail,<br/> Will straight inthrone himself in tyranny,<br/> Makes slaves of you, and with a heavy hand<br/> Curtail and curb your sweetest liberty.<br/> Then, to protect your Country and your King,<br/> Let but the haughty Courage of your hearts<br/> Answer the number of your able hands,<br/> And we shall quickly chase these fugitives.<br/> For what’s this Edward but a belly god,<br/> A tender and lascivious wantoness,<br/> That thother day was almost dead for love?<br/> And what, I pray you, is his goodly guard?<br/> Such as, but scant them of their chines of beef<br/> And take away their downy featherbeds,<br/> And presently they are as resty stiff,<br/> As twere a many over ridden jades.<br/> Then, French men, scorn that such should be your Lords,<br/> And rather bind ye them in captive bands.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00409">All Frenchmen.<br/> Vive le Roy! God save King John of France!<br/></p>
			<p id="id00410">King John.<br/> Now on this plain of Cressy spread your selves⁠—<br/> And, Edward, when thou darest, begin the fight.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00411">[Exeunt King John, Charles, Philip, Lorrain, Boheme, and Forces.]</p>
			<p id="id00412">King Edward.<br/> We presently will meet thee, John of France:⁠—<br/> And, English Lords, let us resolve this day,<br/> Either to clear us of that scandalous crime,<br/> Or be intombed in our innocence.<br/> And, Ned, because this battle is the first<br/> That ever yet thou foughtest in pitched field,<br/> As ancient custom is of Martialists,<br/> To dub thee with the tip of chivalry,<br/> In solemn manner we will give thee arms.<br/> Come, therefore, Heralds, orderly bring forth<br/> A strong attirement for the prince my son.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00413">[Enter four Heralds, bringing in a coat armour, a helmet, a lance, and a shield.]</p>
			<p id="id00414" style="margin-top: 2em">King Edward.<br/> Edward Plantagenet, in the name of God,<br/> As with this armour I impale thy breast,<br/> So be thy noble unrelenting heart<br/> Walled in with flint of matchless fortitude,<br/> That never base affections enter there:<br/> Fight and be valiant, conquer where thou comest!<br/> Now follow, Lords, and do him honor to.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00415">Darby.<br/> Edward Plantagenet, prince of Wales,<br/> As I do set this helmet on thy head,<br/> Wherewith the chamber of thy brain is fenst,<br/> So may thy temples, with Bellona’s hand,<br/> Be still adorned with laurel victory:<br/> Fight and be valiant, conquer where thou comest!<br/></p>
			<p id="id00416">Audley.<br/> Edward Plantagenet, prince of Wales,<br/> Receive this lance into thy manly hand;<br/> Use it in fashion of a brazen pen,<br/> To draw forth bloody stratagems in France,<br/> And print thy valiant deeds in honor’s book:<br/> Fight and be valiant, vanquish where thou comest!<br/></p>
			<p id="id00417">Artois.<br/> Edward Plantagenet, prince of Wales,<br/> Hold, take this target, wear it on thy arm;<br/> And may the view thereof, like Perseus’ shield,<br/> Astonish and transform thy gazing foes<br/> To senseless images of meager death:<br/> Fight and be valiant, conquer where thou comest!<br/></p>
			<p id="id00418">King Edward.<br/> Now wants there nought but knighthood, which deferred<br/> We leave, till thou hast won it in the field.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00419">Prince Edward.<br/> My gracious father and ye forward peers,<br/> This honor you have done me, animates<br/> And cheers my green, yet scarce appearing strength<br/> With comfortable good presaging signs,<br/> No other wise than did old Jacob’s words,<br/> When as he breathed his blessings on his sons.<br/> These hallowed gifts of yours when I profane,<br/> Or use them not to glory of my God,<br/> To patronage the fatherless and poor,<br/> Or for the benefit of England’s peace,<br/> Be numb my joints, wax feeble both mine arms,<br/> Wither my heart, that, like a sapless tree,<br/> I may remain the map of infamy.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00420">King Edward.<br/> Then thus our steeled Battles shall be ranged:<br/> The leading of the vaward, Ned, is thine;<br/> To dignify whose lusty spirit the more,<br/> We temper it with Audly’s gravity,<br/> That, courage and experience joined in one,<br/> Your manage may be second unto none:<br/> For the main battles, I will guide my self;<br/> And, Darby, in the rearward march behind,<br/> That orderly disposed and set in ray,<br/> Let us to horse; and God grant us the day!<br/></p>
			<p id="id00421">[Exeunt.]</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
