<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 3</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4 id="id00098" style="margin-top: 2em">Act I. Scene II. Roxborough. Before the Castle.</h4>
			<p id="id00099">[Enter the Countess.]</p>
			<p id="id00100">Countess.<br/> Alas, how much in vain my poor eyes gaze<br/> For succour that my sovereign should send!<br/> Ah, cousin Mountague, I fear thou wants<br/> The lively spirit, sharply to solicit<br/> With vehement suit the king in my behalf:<br/> Thou dost not tell him, what a grief it is<br/> To be the scornful captive of a Scot,<br/> Either to be wooed with broad untuned oaths,<br/> Or forced by rough insulting barbarism;<br/> Thou doest not tell him, if he here prevail,<br/> How much they will deride us in the North,<br/> And, in their wild, uncivil, skipping gigs,<br/> Bray forth their Conquest and our overthrow<br/> Even in the barren, bleak, and fruitless air.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00101">[Enter David and Douglas, Lorrain.]</p>
			<p id="id00102">I must withdraw, the everlasting foe<br/> Comes to the wall; I’ll closely step aside,<br/> And list their babble, blunt and full of pride.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00103">King David.<br/> My Lord of Lorrain, to our brother of France<br/> Commend us, as the man in Christendom<br/> That we most reverence and entirely love.<br/> Touching your embassage, return and say,<br/> That we with England will not enter parley,<br/> Nor never make fair weather, or take truce;<br/> But burn their neighbor towns, and so persist<br/> With eager Rods beyond their City York.<br/> And never shall our bonny riders rest,<br/> Nor rusting canker have the time to eat<br/> Their light borne snaffles nor their nimble spurs,<br/> Nor lay aside their Jacks of Gymould mayle,<br/> Nor hang their staves of grained Scottish ash<br/> In peaceful wise upon their City walls,<br/> Nor from their buttoned tawny leathern belts<br/> Dismiss their biting whinyards, till your King<br/> Cry out: Enough, spare England now for pity!<br/> Farewell, and tell him that you leave us here<br/> Before this Castle; say, you came from us,<br/> Even when we had that yielded to our hands.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00104">Lorrain.<br/> I take my leave, and fairly will return<br/> Your acceptable greeting to my king.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00105">[Exit Lorrain.]</p>
			<p id="id00106">King David.<br/> Now, Douglas, to our former task again,<br/> For the division of this certain spoil.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00107">Douglas.<br/> My liege, I crave the Lady, and no more.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00108">King David.<br/> Nay, soft ye, sir; first I must make my choice,<br/> And first I do bespeak her for my self.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00109">Douglas.<br/> Why then, my liege, let me enjoy her jewels.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00110">King David.<br/> Those are her own, still liable to her,<br/> And who inherits her, hath those with all.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00111">[Enter a Scot in haste.]</p>
			<p id="id00112">Messenger.<br/> My liege, as we were pricking on the hills,<br/> To fetch in booty, marching hitherward,<br/> We might descry a might host of men;<br/> The Sun, reflecting on the armour, shewed<br/> A field of plate, a wood of picks advanced.<br/> Bethink your highness speedily herein:<br/> An easy march within four hours will bring<br/> The hindmost rank unto this place, my liege.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00113">King David.<br/> Dislodge, dislodge! it is the king of England.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00114">Douglas.<br/> Jemmy, my man, saddle my bonny black.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00115">King David.<br/> Meanst thou to fight, Douglas? we are too weak.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00116">Douglas.<br/> I know it well, my liege, and therefore fly.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00117">Countess.<br/> My Lords of Scotland, will ye stay and drink?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00118">King David.<br/> She mocks at us, Douglas; I cannot endure it.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00119">Countess.<br/> Say, good my Lord, which is he must have the Lady,<br/> And which her jewels? I am sure, my Lords,<br/> Ye will not hence, till you have shared the spoils.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00120">King David.<br/> She heard the messenger, and heard our talk;<br/> And now that comfort makes her scorn at us.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00121">[Another messenger.]</p>
			<p id="id00122" style="margin-top: 2em">Messenger.<br/> Arm, my good Lord! O, we are all surprised!<br/></p>
			<p id="id00123">Countess.<br/> After the French ambassador, my liege,<br/> And tell him, that you dare not ride to York;<br/> Excuse it that your bonny horse is lame.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00124">King David.<br/> She heard that too; intolerable grief!<br/> Woman, farewell! Although I do not stay … <br/></p>
			<p id="id00125">[Exeunt Scots.]</p>
			<p id="id00126">Countess.<br/> Tis not for fear, and yet you run away.⁠—<br/> O happy comfort, welcome to our house!<br/> The confident and boisterous boasting Scot,<br/> That swore before my walls they would not back<br/> For all the armed power of this land,<br/> With faceless fear that ever turns his back,<br/> Turned hence against the blasting North-east wind<br/> Upon the bare report and name of Arms.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00127">[Enter Mountague.]</p>
			<p id="id00128">O Summer’s day! See where my Cousin comes!</p>
			<p id="id00129">Mountague.<br/> How fares my Aunt? We are not Scots;<br/> Why do you shut your gates against your friends?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00130">Countess.<br/> Well may I give a welcome, Cousin, to thee,<br/> For thou comst well to chase my foes from hence.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00131">Mountague.<br/> The king himself is come in person hither;<br/> Dear Aunt, descend, and gratulate his highness.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00132">Countess.<br/> How may I entertain his Majesty,<br/> To shew my duty and his dignity?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00133">[Exit, from above.]</p>
			<p id="id00134" style="margin-top: 2em">[Enter King Edward, Warwick, Artois, with others.]</p>
			<p id="id00135">King Edward.<br/> What, are the stealing Foxes fled and gone,<br/> Before we could uncouple at their heels?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00136">Warwick.<br/> They are, my liege; but, with a cheerful cry,<br/> Hot hounds and hardy chase them at the heels.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00137">[Enter Countess.]</p>
			<p id="id00138">King Edward.<br/> This is the Countess, Warwick, is it not?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00139">Warwick.<br/> Even she, my liege; whose beauty tyrants fear,<br/> As a May blossom with pernicious winds,<br/> Hath sullied, withered, overcast, and done.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00140">King Edward.<br/> Hath she been fairer, Warwick, than she is?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00141">Warwick.<br/> My gracious King, fair is she not at all,<br/> If that her self were by to stain her self,<br/> As I have scene her when she was her self.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00142">King Edward.<br/> What strange enchantment lurked in those her eyes,<br/> When they excelled this excellence they have,<br/> That now her dim decline hath power to draw<br/> My subject eyes from persing majesty,<br/> To gaze on her with doting admiration?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00143">Countess.<br/> In duty lower than the ground I kneel,<br/> And for my dull knees bow my feeling heart,<br/> To witness my obedience to your highness,<br/> With many millions of a subject’s thanks<br/> For this your Royal presence, whose approach<br/> Hath driven war and danger from my gate.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00144">King Edward.<br/> Lady, stand up; I come to bring thee peace,<br/> How ever thereby I have purchased war.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00145">Countess.<br/> No war to you, my liege; the Scots are gone,<br/> And gallop home toward Scotland with their hate.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00146">King Edward.<br/> Least, yielding here, I pine in shameful love,<br/> Come, we’ll pursue the Scots;⁠—Artois, away!<br/></p>
			<p id="id00147">Countess.<br/> A little while, my gracious sovereign, stay,<br/> And let the power of a mighty king<br/> Honor our roof; my husband in the wars,<br/> When he shall hear it, will triumph for joy;<br/> Then, dear my liege, now niggard not thy state:<br/> Being at the wall, enter our homely gate.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00148">King Edward.<br/> Pardon me, countess, I will come no near;<br/> I dreamed to night of treason, and I fear.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00149">Countess.<br/> Far from this place let ugly treason lie!<br/></p>
			<p id="id00150">King Edward.<br/> No farther off, than her conspiring eye,<br/> Which shoots infected poison in my heart,<br/> Beyond repulse of wit or cure of Art.<br/> Now, in the Sun alone it doth not lie,<br/> With light to take light from a mortal eye;<br/> For here two day stars that mine eyes would see<br/> More than the Sun steals mine own light from me,<br/> Contemplative desire, desire to be<br/> In contemplation, that may master thee!<br/> Warwick, Artois, to horse and let’s away!<br/></p>
			<p id="id00151">Countess.<br/> What might I speak to make my sovereign stay?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00152">King Edward.<br/> What needs a tongue to such a speaking eye,<br/> That more persuades than winning Oratory?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00153">Countess.<br/> Let not thy presence, like the April sun,<br/> Flatter our earth and suddenly be done.<br/> More happy do not make our outward wall<br/> Than thou wilt grace our inner house withal.<br/> Our house, my liege, is like a Country swain,<br/> Whose habit rude and manners blunt and plain<br/> Presageth nought, yet inly beautified<br/> With bounties, riches and faire hidden pride.<br/> For where the golden Ore doth buried lie,<br/> The ground, undecked with nature’s tapestry,<br/> Seems barren, sere, unfertile, fructless, dry;<br/> And where the upper turf of earth doth boast<br/> His pied perfumes and party coloured coat,<br/> Delve there, and find this issue and their pride<br/> To spring from ordure and corruption’s side.<br/> But, to make up my all too long compare,<br/> These ragged walls no testimony are,<br/> What is within; but, like a cloak, doth hide<br/> >From weather’s Waste the under garnished pride.<br/> More gracious then my terms can let thee be,<br/> Intreat thy self to stay a while with me.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00154">King Edward.<br/> As wise, as fair; what fond fit can be heard,<br/> When wisdom keeps the gate as beauty’s guard?⁠—<br/> It shall attend, while I attend on thee:<br/> Come on, my Lords; here will I host to night.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00155">[Exeunt.]</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
