<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 10</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-10" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4 id="id00428" style="margin-top: 2em">Act III. Scene V. The Same.</h4>
			<p id="id00429">[Enter King Edward and Audley.]</p>
			<p id="id00430">King Edward.<br/> Lord Audley, whiles our son is in the chase,<br/> With draw our powers unto this little hill,<br/> And here a season let us breath our selves.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00431">Audley.<br/> I will, my Lord.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00432">[Exit. Sound Retreat.]</p>
			<p id="id00433">King Edward.<br/> Just dooming heaven, whose secret providence<br/> To our gross judgement is inscrutable,<br/> How are we bound to praise thy wondrous works,<br/> That hast this day given way unto the right,<br/> And made the wicked stumble at them selves!<br/></p>
			<p id="id00434">[Enter Artois.]</p>
			<p id="id00435">Artois.<br/> Rescue, king Edward! rescue for thy son!<br/></p>
			<p id="id00436">King Edward.<br/> Rescue, Artois? what, is he prisoner,<br/> Or by violence fell beside his horse?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00437">Artois.<br/> Neither, my Lord: but narrowly beset<br/> With turning Frenchmen, whom he did pursue,<br/> As tis impossible that he should scape,<br/> Except your highness presently descend.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00438">King Edward.<br/> Tut, let him fight; we gave him arms to day,<br/> And he is laboring for a knighthood, man.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00439">[Enter Derby.]</p>
			<p id="id00440">Darby.<br/> The Prince, my Lord, the Prince! oh, succour him!<br/> He’s close incompast with a world of odds!<br/></p>
			<p id="id00441">King Edward.<br/> Then will he win a world of honor too,<br/> If he by valour can redeem him thence;<br/> If not, what remedy? we have more sons<br/> Than one, to comfort our declining age.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00442">[Enter Audley.]</p>
			<p id="id00443">Renowned Edward, give me leave, I pray,<br/> To lead my soldiers where I may relieve<br/> Your Grace’s son, in danger to be slain.<br/> The snares of French, like Emmets on a bank,<br/> Muster about him; whilest he, Lion like,<br/> Intangled in the net of their assaults,<br/> Franticly wrends, and bites the woven toil;<br/> But all in vain, he cannot free him self.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00444">King Edward.<br/> Audley, content; I will not have a man,<br/> On pain of death, sent forth to succour him:<br/> This is the day, ordained by destiny,<br/> To season his courage with those grievous thoughts,<br/> That, if he breaketh out, Nestor’s years on earth<br/> Will make him savor still of this exploit.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00445">Darby.<br/> Ah, but he shall not live to see those days.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00446">King Edward.<br/> Why, then his Epitaph is lasting praise.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00447">Audley.<br/> Yet, good my Lord, tis too much willfulness,<br/> To let his blood be spilt, that may be saved.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00448">King Edward.<br/> Exclaim no more; for none of you can tell<br/> Whether a borrowed aid will serve, or no;<br/> Perhaps he is already slain or ta’en.<br/> And dare a Falcon when she’s in her flight,<br/> And ever after she’ll be haggard like:<br/> Let Edward be delivered by our hands,<br/> And still, in danger, he’ll expect the like;<br/> But if himself himself redeem from thence,<br/> He will have vanquished cheerful death and fear,<br/> And ever after dread their force no more<br/> Than if they were but babes or Captive slaves.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00449">Audley.<br/> O cruel Father! Farewell, Edward, then!<br/></p>
			<p id="id00450">Darby.<br/> Farewell, sweet Prince, the hope of chivalry!<br/></p>
			<p id="id00451">Artois.<br/> O, would my life might ransom him from death!<br/></p>
			<p id="id00452">King Edward.<br/> But soft, me thinks I hear<br/></p>
			<p id="id00453">[Retreat sounded.]</p>
			<p id="id00454">The dismal charge of Trumpets’ loud retreat.<br/> All are not slain, I hope, that went with him;<br/> Some will return with tidings, good or bad.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00455">[Enter Prince Edward in triumph, bearing in his hands his chivered Lance, and the King of Boheme, borne before, wrapped in the Colours. They run and imbrace him.]</p>
			<p id="id00456">Audley.<br/> O joyful sight! victorious Edward lives!<br/></p>
			<p id="id00457">Derby.<br/> Welcome, brave Prince!<br/></p>
			<p id="id00458">King Edward.<br/> Welcome, Plantagenet!<br/></p>
			<h5 id="id00459">Prince Edward.</h5>
			<p id="id00460">[Kneels and kisses his father’s hand.]</p>
			<p id="id00461">First having done my duty as beseemed,<br/> Lords, I regreet you all with hearty thanks.<br/> And now, behold, after my winter’s toil,<br/> My painful voyage on the boisterous sea<br/> Of wars devouring gulfs and steely rocks,<br/></p>
			<p id="id00462">I bring my fraught unto the wished port,<br/> My Summer’s hope, my travels’ sweet reward:<br/> And here, with humble duty, I present<br/> This sacrifice, this first fruit of my sword,<br/> Cropped and cut down even at the gate of death,<br/> The king of Boheme, father, whom I slew;<br/> Whose thousands had entrenched me round about,<br/> And lay as thick upon my battered crest,<br/> As on an Anvil, with their ponderous glaves:<br/> Yet marble courage still did underprop<br/> And when my weary arms, with often blows,<br/> Like the continual laboring Wood-man’s Axe<br/> That is enjoined to fell a load of Oaks,<br/> Began to faulter, straight I would record<br/> My gifts you gave me, and my zealous vow,<br/> And then new courage made me fresh again,<br/> That, in despite, I carved my passage forth,<br/> And put the multitude to speedy flight.<br/> Lo, thus hath Edward’s hand filled your request,<br/> And done, I hope, the duty of a Knight.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00463">King Edward.<br/> Aye, well thou hast deserved a knighthood, Ned!<br/> And, therefore, with thy sword, yet reaking warm<br/></p>
			<p id="id00464">[His Sword borne by a Soldier.]</p>
			<p id="id00465">With blood of those that fought to be thy bane.<br/> Arise, Prince Edward, trusty knight at arms:<br/> This day thou hast confounded me with joy,<br/> And proud thy self fit heir unto a king.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00466">Prince Edward.<br/> Here is a note, my gracious Lord, of those<br/> That in this conflict of our foes were slain:<br/> Eleven Princes of esteem, Four score Barons,<br/> A hundred and twenty knights, and thirty thousand<br/> Common soldiers; and, of our men, a thousand.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00467">King Edward.<br/> Our God be praised! Now, John of France, I hope,<br/> Thou knowest King Edward for no wantoness,<br/> No love sick cockney, nor his soldiers jades.<br/> But which way is the fearful king escaped?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00468">Prince Edward.<br/> Towards Poitiers, noble father, and his sons.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00469">King Edward.<br/> Ned, thou and Audley shall pursue them still;<br/> My self and Derby will to Calice straight,<br/> And there be begirt that Haven town with siege.<br/> Now lies it on an upshot; therefore strike,<br/> And wistly follow, whiles the game’s on foot.<br/> What Picture’s this?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00470">Prince Edward.<br/> A Pelican, my Lord,<br/> Wounding her bosom with her crooked beak,<br/> That so her nest of young ones may be fed<br/> With drops of blood that issue from her heart;<br/> The motto Sic &amp; vos, ‘and so should you.’<br/></p>
			<p id="id00471">[Exeunt.]</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
