<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 19</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-19" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4 id="id00643" style="margin-top: 2em">Act V. Scene I. Picardy. The English Camp before Calais.</h4>
			<p id="id00644">[Enter King Edward, Queen Phillip, Derby, soldiers.]</p>
			<p id="id00645">King Edward.<br/> No more, Queen Phillip, pacify your self;<br/> Copland, except he can excuse his fault,<br/> Shall find displeasure written in our looks.<br/> And now unto this proud resisting town!<br/> Soldiers, assault: I will no longer stay,<br/> To be deluded by their false delays;<br/> Put all to sword, and make the spoil your own.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00646">[Enter six Citizens in their Shirts, bare foot, with halters about their necks.]</p>
			<p id="id00647">All.<br/> Mercy, king Edward, mercy, gracious Lord!<br/></p>
			<p id="id00648">King Edward.<br/> Contemptuous villains, call ye now for truce?<br/> Mine ears are stopped against your bootless cries:⁠—<br/> Sound, drums alarum; draw threatening swords!<br/></p>
			<p id="id00649">First Citizen.<br/> Ah, noble Prince, take pity on this town,<br/> And hear us, mighty king:<br/> We claim the promise that your highness made;<br/> The two days’ respite is not yet expired,<br/> And we are come with willingness to bear<br/> What torturing death or punishment you please,<br/> So that the trembling multitude be saved.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00650">King Edward.<br/> My promise? Well, I do confess as much:<br/> But I do require the chiefest Citizens<br/> And men of most account that should submit;<br/> You, peradventure, are but servile grooms,<br/> Or some felonious robbers on the Sea,<br/> Whom, apprehended, law would execute,<br/> Albeit severity lay dead in us:<br/> No, no, ye cannot overreach us thus.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00651">Second Citizen.<br/> The Sun, dread Lord, that in the western fall<br/> Beholds us now low brought through misery,<br/> Did in the Orient purple of the morn<br/> Salute our coming forth, when we were known;<br/> Or may our portion be with damned fiends.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00652">King Edward.<br/> If it be so, then let our covenant stand:<br/> We take possession of the town in peace,<br/> But, for your selves, look you for no remorse;<br/> But, as imperial justice hath decreed,<br/> Your bodies shall be dragged about these walls,<br/> And after feel the stroke of quartering steel:<br/> This is your doom;⁠—go, soldiers, see it done.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00653">Queen Phillip.<br/> Ah, be more mild unto these yielding men!<br/> It is a glorious thing to stablish peace,<br/> And kings approach the nearest unto God<br/> By giving life and safety unto men:<br/> As thou intendest to be king of France,<br/> So let her people live to call thee king;<br/> For what the sword cuts down or fire hath spoiled,<br/> Is held in reputation none of ours.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00654">King Edward.<br/> Although experience teach us this is true,<br/> That peaceful quietness brings most delight,<br/> When most of all abuses are controlled;<br/> Yet, insomuch it shall be known that we<br/> As well can master our affections<br/> As conquer other by the dint of sword,<br/> Phillip, prevail; we yield to thy request:<br/> These men shall live to boast of clemency,<br/> And, tyranny, strike terror to thy self.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00655">Second Citizen.<br/> Long live your highness! happy be your reign!<br/></p>
			<p id="id00656">King Edward.<br/> Go, get you hence, return unto the town,<br/> And if this kindness hath deserved your love,<br/> Learn then to reverence Edward as your king.⁠—<br/></p>
			<p id="id00657">[Exeunt Citizens.]</p>
			<p id="id00658">Now, might we hear of our affairs abroad,<br/> We would, till gloomy Winter were o’er spent,<br/> Dispose our men in garrison a while.<br/> But who comes here?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00659">[Enter Copland and King David.]</p>
			<p id="id00660">Derby.<br/> Copland, my Lord, and David, King of Scots.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00661">King Edward.<br/> Is this the proud presumptuous Esquire of the North,<br/> That would not yield his prisoner to my Queen?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00662">Copland.<br/> I am, my liege, a Northern Esquire indeed,<br/> But neither proud nor insolent, I trust.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00663">King Edward.<br/> What moved thee, then, to be so obstinate<br/> To contradict our royal Queen’s desire?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00664">Copland.<br/> No wilful disobedience, mighty Lord,<br/> But my desert and public law at arms:<br/> I took the king my self in single fight,<br/> And, like a soldiers, would be loath to lose<br/> The least pre-eminence that I had won.<br/> And Copland straight upon your highness’ charge<br/> Is come to France, and with a lowly mind<br/> Doth vale the bonnet of his victory:<br/> Receive, dread Lord, the custom of my fraught,<br/> The wealthy tribute of my laboring hands,<br/> Which should long since have been surrendered up,<br/> Had but your gracious self been there in place.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00665">Queen Phillip.<br/> But, Copland, thou didst scorn the king’s command,<br/> Neglecting our commission in his name.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00666">Copland.<br/> His name I reverence, but his person more;<br/> His name shall keep me in allegiance still,<br/> But to his person I will bend my knee.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00667">King Edward.<br/> I pray thee, Phillip, let displeasure pass;<br/> This man doth please me, and I like his words:<br/> For what is he that will attempt great deeds,<br/> And lose the glory that ensues the same?<br/> All rivers have recourse unto the Sea,<br/> And Copland’s faith relation to his king.<br/> Kneel, therefore, down: now rise, king Edward’s knight;<br/> And, to maintain thy state, I freely give<br/> Five hundred marks a year to thee and thine.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00668">[Enter Salisbury.]</p>
			<p id="id00669" style="margin-top: 2em">Welcome, Lord Salisbury: what news from Brittain?</p>
			<p id="id00670">Salisbury.<br/> This, mighty king: the Country we have won,<br/> And John de Mountford, regent of that place,<br/> Presents your highness with this Coronet,<br/> Protesting true allegiance to your Grace.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00671">King Edward.<br/> We thank thee for thy service, valiant Earl;<br/> Challenge our favour, for we owe it thee.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00672">Salisbury.<br/> But now, my Lord, as this is joyful news,<br/> So must my voice be tragical again,<br/> And I must sing of doleful accidents.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00673">King Edward.<br/> What, have our men the overthrow at Poitiers?<br/> Or is our son beset with too much odds?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00674">Salisbury.<br/> He was, my Lord: and as my worthless self<br/> With forty other serviceable knights,<br/> Under safe conduct of the Dauphin’s seal,<br/> Did travail that way, finding him distressed,<br/> A troop of Lances met us on the way,<br/> Surprised, and brought us prisoners to the king,<br/> Who, proud of this, and eager of revenge,<br/> Commanded straight to cut off all our heads:<br/> And surely we had died, but that the Duke,<br/> More full of honor than his angry sire,<br/> Procured our quick deliverance from thence;<br/> But, ere we went, ‘Salute your king,’ quoth he,<br/> ‘Bid him provide a funeral for his son:<br/> To day our sword shall cut his thread of life;<br/> And, sooner than he thinks, we’ll be with him,<br/> To quittance those displeasures he hath done.’<br/> This said, we past, not daring to reply;<br/> Our hearts were dead, our looks diffused and wan.<br/> Wandering, at last we climed unto a hill,<br/> >From whence, although our grief were much before,<br/> Yet now to see the occasion with our eyes<br/> Did thrice so much increase our heaviness:<br/> For there, my Lord, oh, there we did descry<br/> Down in a valley how both armies lay.<br/> The French had cast their trenches like a ring,<br/> And every Barricado’s open front<br/> Was thick embossed with brazen ordinance;<br/> Here stood a battaile of ten thousand horse,<br/> There twice as many pikes in quadrant wise,<br/> Here Crossbows, and deadly wounding darts:<br/> And in the midst, like to a slender point<br/> Within the compass of the horizon,<br/> As twere a rising bubble in the sea,<br/> A Hasle wand amidst a wood of Pines,<br/> Or as a bear fast chained unto a stake,<br/> Stood famous Edward, still expecting when<br/> Those dogs of France would fasten on his flesh.<br/> Anon the death procuring knell begins:<br/> Off go the Cannons, that with trembling noise<br/> Did shake the very Mountain where they stood;<br/> Then sound the Trumpets’ clangor in the air,<br/> The battles join: and, when we could no more<br/> Discern the difference twixt the friend and foe,<br/> So intricate the dark confusion was,<br/> Away we turned our watery eyes with sighs,<br/> As black as powder fuming into smoke.<br/> And thus, I fear, unhappy have I told<br/> The most untimely tale of Edward’s fall.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00675">Queen Phillip.<br/> Ah me, is this my welcome into France?<br/> Is this the comfort that I looked to have,<br/> When I should meet with my beloved son?<br/> Sweet Ned, I would thy mother in the sea<br/> Had been prevented of this mortal grief!<br/></p>
			<p id="id00676">King Edward.<br/> Content thee, Phillip; tis not tears will serve<br/> To call him back, if he be taken hence:<br/> Comfort thy self, as I do, gentle Queen,<br/> With hope of sharp, unheard of, dire revenge.⁠—<br/> He bids me to provide his funeral,<br/> And so I will; but all the Peers in France<br/> Shall mourners be, and weep out bloody tears,<br/> Until their empty veins be dry and sere:<br/> The pillars of his hearse shall be his bones;<br/> The mould that covers him, their City ashes;<br/> His knell, the groaning cries of dying men;<br/> And, in the stead of tapers on his tomb,<br/> An hundred fifty towers shall burning blaze,<br/> While we bewail our valiant son’s decease.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00677">[After a flourish, sounded within, enter an herald.]</p>
			<p id="id00678">Herald.<br/> Rejoice, my Lord; ascend the imperial throne!<br/> The mighty and redoubted prince of Wales,<br/> Great servitor to bloody Mars in arms,<br/> The French man’s terror, and his country’s fame,<br/> Triumphant rideth like a Roman peer,<br/> And, lowly at his stirrup, comes afoot<br/> King John of France, together with his son,<br/> In captive bonds; whose diadem he brings<br/> To crown thee with, and to proclaim thee king.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00679">King Edward.<br/> Away with mourning, Phillip, wipe thine eyes;⁠—<br/> Sound, Trumpets, welcome in Plantagenet!<br/></p>
			<p id="id00680">[Enter Prince Edward, king John, Phillip, Audley, Artois.]</p>
			<p id="id00681">As things long lost, when they are found again,<br/> So doth my son rejoice his father’s heart,<br/> For whom even now my soul was much perplexed.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00682">Queen Phillip.<br/> Be this a token to express my joy,<br/></p>
			<p id="id00683">[Kisses him.]</p>
			<p id="id00684">For inward passion will not let me speak.</p>
			<p id="id00685">Prince Edward.<br/> My gracious father, here receive the gift.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00686">[Presenting him with King John’s crown.]</p>
			<p id="id00687">This wreath of conquest and reward of war,<br/> Got with as mickle peril of our lives,<br/> As ere was thing of price before this day;<br/> Install your highness in your proper right:<br/> And, herewithall, I render to your hands<br/> These prisoners, chief occasion of our strife.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00688">King Edward.<br/> So, John of France, I see you keep your word:<br/> You promised to be sooner with our self<br/> Than we did think for, and tis so in deed:<br/> But, had you done at first as now you do,<br/> How many civil towns had stood untouched,<br/> That now are turned to ragged heaps of stones!<br/> How many people’s lives mightst thou have saved,<br/> That are untimely sunk into their graves!<br/></p>
			<p id="id00689">King John.<br/> Edward, recount not things irrevocable;<br/> Tell me what ransom thou requirest to have.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00690">King Edward.<br/> Thy ransom, John, hereafter shall be known:<br/> But first to England thou must cross the seas,<br/> To see what entertainment it affords;<br/> How ere it falls, it cannot be so bad,<br/> As ours hath been since we arrived in France.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00691">King John.<br/> Accursed man! of this I was foretold,<br/> But did misconster what the prophet told.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00692">Prince Edward.<br/> Now, father, this petition Edward makes<br/> To thee, whose grace hath been his strongest shield,<br/> That, as thy pleasure chose me for the man<br/> To be the instrument to shew thy power,<br/> So thou wilt grant that many princes more,<br/> Bred and brought up within that little Isle,<br/> May still be famous for like victories!<br/> And, for my part, the bloody scars I bear,<br/> And weary nights that I have watched in field,<br/> The dangerous conflicts I have often had,<br/> The fearful menaces were proffered me,<br/> The heat and cold and what else might displease:<br/> I wish were now redoubled twenty fold,<br/> So that hereafter ages, when they read<br/> The painful traffic of my tender youth,<br/> Might thereby be inflamed with such resolve,<br/> As not the territories of France alone,<br/> But likewise Spain, Turkey, and what countries else<br/> That justly would provoke fair England’s ire,<br/> Might, at their presence, tremble and retire.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00693">King Edward.<br/> Here, English Lords, we do proclaim a rest,<br/> An intercession of our painful arms:<br/> Sheath up your swords, refresh your weary limbs,<br/> Peruse your spoils; and, after we have breathed<br/> A day or two within this haven town,<br/> God willing, then for England we’ll be shipped;<br/> Where, in a happy hour, I trust, we shall<br/> Arrive, three kings, two princes, and a queen.<br/></p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
