<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 6</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4 id="id00327" style="margin-top: 2em">Act III. Scene I. Flanders. The French Camp.</h4>
			<p id="id00328">[Enter King John of France, his two sons, Charles of<br/> Normandy, and Phillip, and the Duke of Lorrain.]<br/></p>
			<p id="id00329">King John.<br/> Here, till our Navy of a thousand sail<br/> Have made a breakfast to our foe by Sea,<br/> Let us encamp, to wait their happy speed.⁠—<br/> Lorraine, what readiness is Edward in?<br/> How hast thou heard that he provided is<br/> Of marshall furniture for this exploit?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00330">LorrainE.<br/> To lay aside unnecessary soothing,<br/> And not to spend the time in circumstance,<br/> Tis bruited for a certainty, my Lord,<br/> That he’s exceeding strongly fortified;<br/> His subjects flock as willingly to war,<br/> As if unto a triumph they were led.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00331">Charles.<br/> England was wont to harbour malcontents,<br/> Blood thirsty and seditious Catelynes,<br/> Spend thrifts, and such as gape for nothing else<br/> But changing and alteration of the state;<br/> And is it possible<br/> That they are now so loyal in them selves?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00332">LorrainE.<br/> All but the Scot, who solemnly protests,<br/> As heretofore I have informed his grace,<br/> Never to sheath his Sword or take a truce.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00333">King John.<br/> Ah, that’s the anchorage of some better hope!<br/> But, on the other side, to think what friends<br/> King Edward hath retained in Netherland,<br/> Among those ever-bibbing Epicures,<br/> Those frothy Dutch men, puft with double beer,<br/> That drink and swill in every place they come,<br/> Doth not a little aggravate mine ire;<br/> Besides, we hear, the Emperor conjoins,<br/> And stalls him in his own authority;<br/> But, all the mightier that their number is,<br/> The greater glory reaps the victory.<br/> Some friends have we beside domestic power;<br/> The stern Polonian, and the warlike Dane,<br/> The king of Bohemia, and of Sicily,<br/> Are all become confederates with us,<br/> And, as I think, are marching hither apace.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00334">[Drum within.]</p>
			<p id="id00335">But soft, I hear the music of their drums,<br/> By which I guess that their approach is near.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00336">[Enter the King of Bohemia, with Danes, and a<br/> Polonian Captain, with other soldiers, another way.]<br/></p>
			<p id="id00337">King of Bohemia.<br/> King John of France, as league and neighborhood<br/> Requires, when friends are any way distrest,<br/> I come to aide thee with my country’s force.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00338">Polonian Captain.<br/> And from great Musco, fearful to the Turk,<br/> And lofty Poland, nurse of hardy men,<br/> I bring these servitors to fight for thee,<br/> Who willingly will venture in thy cause.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00339">King John.<br/> Welcome, Bohemian king, and welcome all:<br/> This your great kindness I will not forget.<br/> Besides your plentiful rewards in Crowns,<br/> That from our Treasury ye shall receive,<br/> There comes a hare brained Nation, decked in pride,<br/> The spoil of whom will be a treble gain.<br/> And now my hope is full, my joy complete:<br/> At Sea, we are as puissant as the force<br/> Of Agamemnon in the Haven of Troy;<br/> By land, with Zerxes we compare of strength,<br/> Whose soldiers drank up rivers in their thirst;<br/> Then Bayardlike, blind, overweaning Ned,<br/> To reach at our imperial diadem<br/> Is either to be swallowed of the waves,<br/> Or hacked a pieces when thou comest ashore.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00340">[Enter Mariner.]</p>
			<p id="id00341">Mariner.<br/> Near to the coast I have descried, my Lord,<br/> As I was buy in my watchful charge,<br/> The proud Armado of king Edward’s ships:<br/> Which, at the first, far off when I did ken,<br/> Seemed as it were a grove of withered pines;<br/> But, drawing near, their glorious bright aspect,<br/> Their streaming Ensigns, wrought of coloured silk,<br/> Like to a meadow full of sundry flowers,<br/> Adorns the naked bosom of the earth:<br/> Majestical the order of their course,<br/> Figuring the horned Circle of the Moon:<br/> And on the top gallant of the Admiral<br/> And likewise all the handmaids of his train<br/> The Arms of England and of France unite<br/> Are quartered equally by Heralds’ art:<br/> Thus, tightly carried with a merry gale,<br/> They plough the Ocean hitherward amain.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00342">King John.<br/> Dare he already crop the Fleur de Luce?<br/> I hope, the honey being gathered thence,<br/> He, with the spider, afterward approached,<br/> Shall suck forth deadly venom from the leaves.⁠—<br/> But where’s our Navy? how are they prepared<br/> To wing them selves against this flight of Ravens?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00343">Mariner.<br/> They, having knowledge, brought them by the scouts,<br/> Did break from Anchor straight, and, puffed with rage,<br/> No otherwise then were their sails with wind,<br/> Made forth, as when the empty Eagle flies,<br/> To satisfy his hungry griping maw.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00344">King John.<br/> There’s for thy news. Return unto thy bark;<br/> And if thou scape the bloody stroke of war<br/> And do survive the conflict, come again,<br/> And let us hear the manner of the fight.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00345">[Exit Mariner.]</p>
			<p id="id00346">Mean space, my Lords, tis best we be dispersed<br/> To several places, least they chance to land:<br/> First you, my Lord, with your Bohemian Troops,<br/> Shall pitch your battailes on the lower hand;<br/> My eldest son, the Duke of Normandy,<br/> Together with the aide of Muscovites,<br/> Shall climb the higher ground another way;<br/> Here in the middle cost, betwixt you both,<br/> Phillip, my youngest boy, and I will lodge.<br/> So, Lors, be gone, and look unto your charge:<br/> You stand for France, an Empire fair and large.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00347">[Exeunt.]</p>
			<p id="id00348">Now tell me, Phillip, what is thy concept,<br/> Touching the challenge that the English make?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00349">Phillip.<br/> I say, my Lord, claim Edward what he can,<br/> And bring he ne’er so plain a pedigree,<br/> Tis you are in the possession of the Crown,<br/> And that’s the surest point of all the Law:<br/> But, were it not, yet ere he should prevail,<br/> I’ll make a Conduit of my dearest blood,<br/> Or chase those straggling upstarts home again.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00350">King John.<br/> Well said, young Phillip! Call for bread and Wine,<br/> That we may cheer our stomachs with repast,<br/> To look our foes more sternly in the face.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00351">[A Table and Provisions brought in. The battle hard a far off.]</p>
			<p id="id00352">Now is begun the heavy day at Sea:<br/> Fight, Frenchmen, fight; be like the field of Bears,<br/> When they defend their younglings in the Caves!<br/> Stir, angry Nemesis, the happy helm,<br/> That, with the sulphur battles of your rage,<br/> The English Fleet may be dispersed and sunk.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00353">[Shot.]</p>
			<p id="id00354">Phillip.<br/> O Father, how this echoing Cannon shot,<br/> Like sweet harmony, digests my eats!<br/></p>
			<p id="id00355">King John.<br/> Now, boy, thou hearest what thundering terror tis,<br/> To buckle for a kingdom’s sovereignty:<br/> The earth, with giddy trembling when it shakes,<br/> Or when the exhalations of the air<br/> Breaks in extremity of lightning flash,<br/> Affrights not more than kings, when they dispose<br/> To shew the rancor of their high swollen hearts.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00356">[Retreat.]</p>
			<p id="id00357">Retreat is sounded; one side hath the worse;<br/> O, if it be the French, sweet fortune, turn;<br/> And, in thy turning, change the forward winds,<br/> That, with advantage of a favoring sky,<br/> Our men may vanquish, and the other fly!<br/></p>
			<p id="id00358">[Enter Mariner.]</p>
			<p id="id00359">My heart misgives:⁠—say, mirror of pale death,<br/> To whom belongs the honor of this day?<br/> Relate, I pray thee, if thy breath will serve,<br/> The sad discourse of this discomfiture.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00360">Mariner.<br/> I will, my Lord.<br/> My gracious sovereign, France hath ta’en the foil,<br/> And boasting Edward triumphs with success.<br/> These Iron hearted Navies,<br/> When last I was reporter to your grace,<br/> Both full of angry spleen, of hope, and fear,<br/> Hasting to meet each other in the face,<br/> At last conjoined; and by their Admiral<br/> Our Admiral encountered many shot:<br/> By this, the other, that beheld these twain<br/> Give earnest penny of a further wrack,<br/> Like fiery Dragons took their haughty flight;<br/> And, likewise meeting, from their smoky wombs<br/> Sent many grim Ambassadors of death.<br/> Then gan the day to turn to gloomy night,<br/> And darkness did as well enclose the quick<br/> As those that were but newly reft of life.<br/> No leisure served for friends to bid farewell;<br/> And, if it had, the hideous noise was such,<br/> As each to other seemed deaf and dumb.<br/> Purple the Sea, whose channel filled as fast<br/> With streaming gore, that from the maimed fell,<br/> As did her gushing moisture break into<br/> The crannied cleftures of the through shot planks.<br/> Here flew a head, dissevered from the trunk,<br/> There mangled arms and legs were tossed aloft,<br/> As when a whirl wind takes the Summer dust<br/> And scatters it in middle of the air.<br/> Then might ye see the reeling vessels split,<br/> And tottering sink into the ruthless flood,<br/> Until their lofty tops were seen no more.<br/> All shifts were tried, both for defence and hurt:<br/> And now the effect of valor and of force,<br/> Of resolution and of cowardice,<br/> We lively pictures; how the one for fame,<br/> The other by compulsion laid about;<br/> Much did the Nonpareille, that brave ship;<br/> So did the black snake of Bullen, then which<br/> A bonnier vessel never yet spread sail.<br/> But all in vain; both Sun, the Wind and tide,<br/> Revolted all unto our foe men’s side,<br/> That we perforce were fain to give them way,<br/> And they are landed.⁠—Thus my tale is done:<br/> We have untimely lost, and they have won.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00361">King John.<br/> Then rests there nothing, but with present speed<br/> To join our several forces all in one,<br/> And bid them battle, ere they range too far.<br/> Come, gentle Phillip, let us hence depart;<br/> This soldier’s words have pierced thy father’s heart.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00362">[Exeunt.]</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
