<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 11</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-11" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4 id="id00472" style="margin-top: 2em">Act IV. Scene I. Bretagne. Camp of the English.</h4>
			<p id="id00473">[Enter Lord Mountford with a Coronet in his hand; with him the Earl of Salisbury.]</p>
			<p id="id00474">Mountford.<br/> My Lord of Salisbury, since by your aide<br/> Mine enemy Sir Charles of Blois is slain,<br/> And I again am quietly possessed<br/> In Brittain’s Dukedom, know that I resolve,<br/> For this kind furtherance of your king and you,<br/> To swear allegiance to his majesty:<br/> In sign whereof receive this Coronet,<br/> Bear it unto him, and, withal, mine oath,<br/> Never to be but Edward’s faithful friend.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00475">Salisbury.<br/> I take it, Mountfort. Thus, I hope, ere long<br/> The whole Dominions of the Realm of France<br/> Will be surrendered to his conquering hand.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00476">[Exit Mountford.]</p>
			<p id="id00477">Now, if I knew but safely how to pass,<br/> I would at Calice gladly meet his Grace,<br/> Whether I am by letters certified<br/> That he intends to have his host removed.<br/> It shall be so, this policy will serve:⁠—<br/> Ho, whose within? Bring Villiers to me.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00478">[Enter Villiers.]</p>
			<p id="id00479">Villiers, thou knowest, thou art my prisoner,<br/> And that I might for ransom, if I would,<br/> Require of thee a hundred thousand Francs,<br/> Or else retain and keep thee captive still:<br/> But so it is, that for a smaller charge<br/> Thou maist be quit, and if thou wilt thy self.<br/> And this it is: Procure me but a passport<br/> Of Charles, the Duke of Normandy, that I<br/> Without restraint may have recourse to Callis<br/> Through all the Countries where he hath to do;<br/> Which thou maist easily obtain, I think,<br/> By reason I have often heard thee say,<br/> He and thou were students once together:<br/> And then thou shalt be set at liberty.<br/> How saiest thou? wilt thou undertake to do it?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00480">Villiers.<br/> I will, my Lord; but I must speak with him.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00481">Salisbury.<br/> Why, so thou shalt; take Horse, and post from hence:<br/> Only before thou goest, swear by thy faith,<br/> That, if thou canst not compass my desire,<br/> Thou wilt return my prisoner back again;<br/> And that shall be sufficient warrant for me.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00482">Villiers.<br/> To that condition I agree, my Lord,<br/> And will unfainedly perform the same.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00483">[Exit.]</p>
			<p id="id00484">Salisbury.<br/> Farewell, Villiers.⁠—<br/> Thus once i mean to try a French man’s faith.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00485">[Exit.]</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
