<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 14</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-14" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4 id="id00563" style="margin-top: 2em">Act IV. Scene V. The same. The French Camp.</h4>
			<p id="id00564">[Enter King John and Charles.]</p>
			<p id="id00565">King John.<br/> A sudden darkness hath defaced the sky,<br/> The winds are crept into their caves for fear,<br/> The leaves move not, the world is hushed and still,<br/> The birds cease singing, and the wandering brooks<br/> Murmur no wonted greeting to their shores;<br/> Silence attends some wonder and expecteth<br/> That heaven should pronounce some prophesy:<br/> Where, or from whom, proceeds this silence, Charles?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00566">Charles.<br/> Our men, with open mouths and staring eyes,<br/> Look on each other, as they did attend<br/> Each other’s words, and yet no creature speaks;<br/> A tongue-tied fear hath made a midnight hour,<br/> And speeches sleep through all the waking regions.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00567">King John.<br/> But now the pompous Sun, in all his pride,<br/> Looked through his golden coach upon the world,<br/> And, on a sudden, hath he hid himself,<br/> That now the under earth is as a grave,<br/> Dark, deadly, silent, and uncomfortable.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00568">[A clamor of ravens.]</p>
			<p id="id00569">Hark, what a deadly outery do I hear?</p>
			<p id="id00570">Charles.<br/> Here comes my brother Phillip.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00571">King John.<br/> All dismayed:<br/></p>
			<p id="id00572">[Enter Phillip.]</p>
			<p id="id00573">What fearful words are those thy looks presage?</p>
			<p id="id00574">Phillip.<br/> A flight, a flight!<br/></p>
			<p id="id00575">King John.<br/> Coward, what flight? thou liest, there needs no flight.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00576">Phillip.<br/> A flight.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00577">King John.<br/> Awake thy craven powers, and tell on<br/> The substance of that very fear in deed,<br/> Which is so ghastly printed in thy face:<br/> What is the matter?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00578">Phillip.<br/> A flight of ugly ravens<br/> Do croak and hover o’er our soldiers’ heads,<br/> And keep in triangles and cornered squares,<br/> Right as our forces are embattled;<br/> With their approach there came this sudden fog,<br/> Which now hath hid the airy floor of heaven<br/> And made at noon a night unnatural<br/> Upon the quaking and dismayed world:<br/> In brief, our soldiers have let fall their arms,<br/> And stand like metamorphosed images,<br/> Bloodless and pale, one gazing on another.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00579">King John.<br/> Aye, now I call to mind the prophesy,<br/> But I must give no entrance to a fear.⁠—<br/> Return, and hearten up these yielding souls:<br/> Tell them, the ravens, seeing them in arms,<br/> So many fair against a famished few,<br/> Come but to dine upon their handy work<br/> And prey upon the carrion that they kill:<br/> For when we see a horse laid down to die,<br/> Although he be not dead, the ravenous birds<br/> Sit watching the departure of his life;<br/> Even so these ravens for the carcasses<br/> Of those poor English, that are marked to die,<br/> Hover about, and, if they cry to us,<br/> Tis but for meat that we must kill for them.<br/> Away, and comfort up my soldiers,<br/> And sound the trumpets, and at once dispatch<br/> This little business of a silly fraud.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00580">[Exit Phillip.]</p>
			<p id="id00581">[Another noise. Salisbury brought in by a French Captain.]</p>
			<p id="id00582">Captain.<br/> Behold, my liege, this knight and forty mo’,<br/> Of whom the better part are slain and fled,<br/> With all endeavor sought to break our ranks,<br/> And make their way to the encompassed prince:<br/> Dispose of him as please your majesty.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00583">King John.<br/> Go, &amp; the next bough, soldier, that thou seest,<br/> Disgrace it with his body presently;<br/> For I do hold a tree in France too good<br/> To be the gallows of an English thief.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00584">Salisbury.<br/> My Lord of Normandy, I have your pass<br/> And warrant for my safety through this land.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00585" style="margin-top: 2em">Charles.<br/> Villiers procured it for thee, did he not?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00586">Salisbury.<br/> He did.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00587">Charles.<br/> And it is current; thou shalt freely pass.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00588">King John.<br/> Aye, freely to the gallows to be hanged,<br/> Without denial or impediment.<br/> Away with him!<br/></p>
			<p id="id00589">Charles.<br/> I hope your highness will not so disgrace me,<br/> And dash the virtue of my seal at arms:<br/> He hath my never broken name to shew,<br/> Charactered with this princely hand of mine:<br/> And rather let me leave to be a prince<br/> Than break the stable verdict of a prince:<br/> I do beseech you, let him pass in quiet.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00590">King John.<br/> Thou and thy word lie both in my command;<br/> What canst thou promise that I cannot break?<br/> Which of these twain is greater infamy,<br/> To disobey thy father or thy self?<br/> Thy word, nor no mans, may exceed his power;<br/> Nor that same man doth never break his word,<br/> That keeps it to the utmost of his power.<br/> The breach of faith dwells in the soul’s consent:<br/> Which if thy self without consent do break,<br/> Thou art not charged with the breach of faith.<br/> Go, hang him: for thy license lies in me,<br/> And my constraint stands the excuse for thee.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00591">Charles.<br/> What, am I not a soldier in my word?<br/> Then, arms, adieu, and let them fight that list!<br/> Shall I not give my girdle from my waste,<br/> But with a gardion I shall be controlled,<br/> To say I may not give my things away?<br/> Upon my soul, had Edward, prince of Wales,<br/> Engaged his word, writ down his noble hand<br/> For all your knights to pass his father’s land,<br/> The royal king, to grace his warlike son,<br/> Would not alone safe conduct give to them,<br/> But with all bounty feasted them and theirs.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00592">King John.<br/> Dwelst thou on precedents? Then be it so!<br/> Say, Englishman, of what degree thou art.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00593">Salisbury.<br/> An Earl in England, though a prisoner here,<br/> And those that know me, call me Salisbury.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00594">King John.<br/> Then, Salisbury, say whether thou art bound.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00595">Salisbury.<br/> To Callice, where my liege, king Edward, is.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00596">King John.<br/> To Callice, Salisbury? Then, to Callice pack,<br/> And bid the king prepare a noble grave,<br/> To put his princely son, black Edward, in.<br/> And as thou travelst westward from this place,<br/> Some two leagues hence there is a lofty hill,<br/> Whose top seems topless, for the embracing sky<br/> Doth hide his high head in her azure bosom;<br/> Upon whose tall top when thy foot attains,<br/> Look back upon the humble vale beneath⁠—<br/> Humble of late, but now made proud with arms⁠—<br/> And thence behold the wretched prince of Wales,<br/> Hooped with a bond of iron round about.<br/> After which sight, to Callice spur amain,<br/> And say, the prince was smothered and not slain:<br/> And tell the king this is not all his ill;<br/> For I will greet him, ere he thinks I will.<br/> Away, be gone; the smoke but of our shot<br/> Will choke our foes, though bullets hit them not.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00597">[Exit.]</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
