<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 2</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4 id="id00062" style="margin-top: 2em">Act I. Scene I. London. A Room of State in the Palace. Flourish.</h4>
			<p id="id00063">[Enter King Edward, Derby, Prince Edward, Audley, and<br/> Artois.]<br/></p>
			<p id="id00064">King Edward.<br/> Robert of Artois, banished though thou be<br/> >From France, thy native Country, yet with us<br/> Thou shalt retain as great a Seigniorie:<br/> For we create thee Earl of Richmond here.<br/> And now go forwards with our pedigree:<br/> Who next succeeded Phillip le Bew?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00065">Artois.<br/> Three sons of his, which all successfully<br/> Did sit upon their father’s regal Throne,<br/> Yet died, and left no issue of their loins.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00066">King Edward.<br/> But was my mother sister unto those?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00067">Artois.<br/> She was, my Lord; and only Isabel<br/> Was all the daughters that this Phillip had,<br/> Whom afterward your father took to wife;<br/> And from the fragrant garden of her womb<br/> Your gracious self, the flower of Europe’s hope,<br/> Derived is inheritor to France.<br/> But note the rancor of rebellious minds:<br/> When thus the lineage of le Bew was out,<br/> The French obscured your mother’s Privilege,<br/> And, though she were the next of blood, proclaimed<br/> John, of the house of Valois, now their king:<br/> The reason was, they say, the Realm of France,<br/> Replete with Princes of great parentage,<br/> Ought not admit a governor to rule,<br/> Except he be descended of the male;<br/> And that’s the special ground of their contempt,<br/> Wherewith they study to exclude your grace:<br/> But they shall find that forged ground of theirs<br/> To be but dusty heaps of brittle sand.<br/> Perhaps it will be thought a heinous thing,<br/> That I, a French man, should discover this;<br/> But heaven I call to record of my vows:<br/> It is not hate nor any private wrong,<br/> But love unto my country and the right,<br/> Provokes my tongue, thus lavish in report.<br/> You are the lineal watchman of our peace,<br/> And John of Valois indirectly climbs;<br/> What then should subjects but embrace their King?<br/> Ah, where in may our duty more be seen,<br/> Than striving to rebate a tyrant’s pride<br/> And place the true shepherd of our commonwealth?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00068">King Edward.<br/> This counsel, Artois, like to fruitful showers,<br/> Hath added growth unto my dignity;<br/> And, by the fiery vigor of thy words,<br/> Hot courage is engendered in my breast,<br/> Which heretofore was raked in ignorance,<br/> But now doth mount with golden wings of fame,<br/> And will approve fair Isabel’s descent,<br/> Able to yoke their stubborn necks with steel,<br/> That spurn against my sovereignty in France.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00069">[Sound a horn.]</p>
			<p id="id00070">A messenger?⁠—Lord Audley, know from whence.</p>
			<p id="id00071">[Exit Audley, and returns.]</p>
			<p id="id00072">Audley.<br/> The Duke of Lorrain, having crossed the seas,<br/> Entreats he may have conference with your highness.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00073">King Edward.<br/> Admit him, Lords, that we may hear the news.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00074">[Exeunt Lords. King takes his State. Re-enter Lords; with Lorrain, attended.]</p>
			<p id="id00075">Say, Duke of Lorrain, wherefore art thou come?</p>
			<p id="id00076">Lorrain.<br/> The most renowned prince, King John of France,<br/> Doth greet thee, Edward, and by me commands,<br/> That, for so much as by his liberal gift<br/> The Guyen Dukedom is entailed to thee,<br/> Thou do him lowly homage for the same.<br/> And, for that purpose, here I summon thee,<br/> Repair to France within these forty days,<br/> That there, according as the custom is,<br/> Thou mayst be sworn true liegeman to our King;<br/> Or else thy title in that province dies,<br/> And he him self will repossess the place.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00077">King Edward.<br/> See, how occasion laughs me in the face!<br/> No sooner minded to prepare for France,<br/> But straight I am invited⁠—nay, with threats,<br/> Upon a penalty, enjoined to come:<br/> Twere but a childish part to say him nay.⁠—<br/> Lorrain, return this answer to thy Lord:<br/> I mean to visit him as he requests;<br/> But how? not servilely disposed to bend,<br/> But like a conqueror to make him bow.<br/> His lame unpolished shifts are come to light;<br/> And truth hath pulled the vizard from his face,<br/> That set a gloss upon his arrogance.<br/> Dare he command a fealty in me?<br/> Tell him, the Crown that he usurps, is mine,<br/> And where he sets his foot, he ought to kneel.<br/> Tis not a petty Dukedom that I claim,<br/> But all the whole Dominions of the Realm;<br/> Which if with grudging he refuse to yield,<br/> I’ll take away those borrowed plumes of his,<br/> And send him naked to the wilderness.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00078">Lorrain.<br/> Then, Edward, here, in spite of all thy Lords,<br/> I do pronounce defiance to thy face.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00079">Prince Edward.<br/> Defiance, French man? we rebound it back,<br/> Even to the bottom of thy master’s throat.<br/> And, be it spoke with reverence of the King,<br/> My gracious father, and these other Lords,<br/> I hold thy message but as scurrilous,<br/> And him that sent thee, like the lazy drone,<br/> Crept up by stealth unto the Eagle’s nest;<br/> >From whence we’ll shake him with so rough a storm,<br/> As others shall be warned by his harm.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00080">Warwick.<br/> Bid him leave of the Lyons case he wears,<br/> Least, meeting with the Lyon in the field,<br/> He chance to tear him piecemeal for his pride.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00081">Artois.<br/> The soundest counsel I can give his grace,<br/> Is to surrender ere he be constrained.<br/> A voluntary mischief hath less scorn,<br/> Than when reproach with violence is borne.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00082">Lorrain.<br/> Degenerate Traitor, viper to the place<br/> Where thou was fostered in thine infancy,<br/> Bearest thou a part in this conspiracy?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00083">[He draws his sword.]</p>
			<p id="id00084">King Edward.<br/> Lorrain, behold the sharpness of this steel:<br/></p>
			<p id="id00085">[Drawing his.]</p>
			<p id="id00086">Fervent desire that sits against my heart,<br/> Is far more thorny pricking than this blade;<br/> That, with the nightingale, I shall be scared,<br/> As oft as I dispose my self to rest,<br/> Until my colours be displayed in France:<br/> This is my final Answer; so be gone.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00087">Lorrain.<br/> It is not that, nor any English brave,<br/> Afflicts me so, as doth his poisoned view,<br/> That is most false, should most of all be true.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00088">[Exeunt Lorrain, and Train.]</p>
			<p id="id00089">King Edward.<br/> Now, Lord, our fleeting Bark is under sail;<br/> Our gage is thrown, and war is soon begun,<br/> But not so quickly brought unto an end.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00090">[Enter Mountague.]</p>
			<p id="id00091">But wherefore comes Sir William Mountague?<br/> How stands the league between the Scot and us?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00092">Mountague.<br/> Cracked and dissevered, my renowned Lord.<br/> The treacherous King no sooner was informed<br/> Of your with drawing of your army back,<br/> But straight, forgetting of his former oath,<br/> He made invasion on the bordering Towns:<br/> Barwick is won, Newcastle spoiled and lost,<br/> And now the tyrant hath begirt with siege<br/> The Castle of Rocksborough, where inclosed<br/> The Countess Salisbury is like to perish.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00093">King Edward.<br/> That is thy daughter, Warwick, is it not?<br/> Whose husband hath in Brittain served so long<br/> About the planting of Lord Mountford there?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00094">Warwick.<br/> It is, my Lord.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00095">King Edward.<br/> Ignoble David! hast thou none to grieve<br/> But silly Ladies with thy threatening arms?<br/> But I will make you shrink your snaily horns!<br/> First, therefore, Audley, this shall be thy charge,<br/> Go levy footmen for our wars in France;<br/> And, Ned, take muster of our men at arms:<br/> In every shire elect a several band.<br/> Let them be Soldiers of a lusty spirit,<br/> Such as dread nothing but dishonor’s blot;<br/> Be wary, therefore, since we do commence<br/> A famous War, and with so mighty a nation.<br/> Derby, be thou Ambassador for us<br/> Unto our Father in Law, the Earl of Henalt:<br/> Make him acquainted with our enterprise,<br/> And likewise will him, with our own allies<br/> That are in Flanders, to solicit to<br/> The Emperour of Almaigne in our name.<br/> My self, whilst you are jointly thus employed,<br/> Will, with these forces that I have at hand,<br/> March, and once more repulse the traitorous Scot.<br/> But, Sirs, be resolute: we shall have wars<br/> On every side; and, Ned, thou must begin<br/> Now to forget thy study and thy books,<br/> And ure thy shoulders to an Armor’s weight.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00096">Prince Edward.<br/> As cheerful sounding to my youthful spleen<br/> This tumult is of war’s increasing broils,<br/> As, at the Coronation of a king,<br/> The joyful clamours of the people are,<br/> When Ave, Caesar! they pronounce aloud.<br/> Within this school of honor I shall learn<br/> Either to sacrifice my foes to death,<br/> Or in a rightful quarrel spend my breath.<br/> Then cheerfully forward, each a several way;<br/> In great affairs tis nought to use delay.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00097">[Exeunt.]</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
