<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 5</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4 id="id00249" style="margin-top: 2em">Act II. Scene II. The Same. A Room in the Castle.</h4>
			<p id="id00250">[Enter at one door Derby from France, At an other door<br/> Audley with a Drum.]<br/></p>
			<p id="id00251">Derby.<br/> Thrice noble Audley, well encountered here!<br/> How is it with our sovereign and his peers?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00252">Audley.<br/> Tis full a fortnight, since I saw his highness<br/> What time he sent me forth to muster men;<br/> Which I accordingly have done, and bring them hither<br/> In fair array before his majesty.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00253">What news, my Lord of Derby, from the Emperor?</p>
			<p id="id00254">Derby.<br/> As good as we desire: the Emperor<br/> Hath yielded to his highness friendly aid,<br/> And makes our king lieutenant general<br/> In all his lands and large dominions;<br/> Then via for the spatious bounds of France!<br/></p>
			<p id="id00255">Audley.<br/> What, doth his highness leap to hear these news?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00256">Derby.<br/> I have not yet found time to open them;<br/> The king is in his closet, malcontent;<br/> For what, I know not, but he gave in charge,<br/> Till after dinner none should interrupt him:<br/> The Countess Salisbury and her father Warwick,<br/> Artois and all look underneath the brows.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00257">Audley.<br/> Undoubtedly, then, some thing is amiss.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00258">[Trumpet within.]</p>
			<p id="id00259">Derby.<br/> The Trumpets sound, the king is now abroad.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00260">[Enter the King.]</p>
			<p id="id00261">Audley.<br/> Here comes his highness.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00262">Derby.<br/> Befall my sovereign all my sovereign’s wish!<br/></p>
			<p id="id00263">King Edward.<br/> Ah, that thou wert a Witch to make it so!<br/></p>
			<p id="id00264">Derby.<br/> The Emperour greeteth you.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00265">[Presenting Letters.]</p>
			<p id="id00266">King Edward.<br/>—Would it were the Countess!<br/></p>
			<p id="id00267" style="margin-top: 2em">Derby.<br/> And hath accorded to your highness suite.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00268">King Edward.<br/>—Thou liest, she hath not; but I would she had.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00269">Audley.<br/> All love and duty to my Lord the King!<br/></p>
			<p id="id00270">King Edward.<br/> Well, all but one is none.⁠—What news with you?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00271">Audley.<br/> I have, my liege, levied those horse and foot<br/> According to your charge, and brought them hither.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00272">King Edward.<br/> Then let those foot trudge hence upon those horse<br/> According to our discharge, and be gone.⁠—<br/> Darby, I’ll look upon the Countess’ mind anon.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00273">Derby.<br/> The Countess’ mind, my liege?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00274">King Edward.<br/> I mean the Emperour:⁠—leave me alone.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00275">Audley.<br/> What is his mind?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00276">Derby.<br/> Let’s leave him to his humor.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00277">[Exeunt.]</p>
			<p id="id00278">King Edward.<br/> Thus from the heart’s aboundance speaks the tongue;<br/> Countess for Emperour: and indeed, why not?<br/> She is as imperator over me<br/> And I to her<br/> Am as a kneeling vassal, that observes<br/> The pleasure or displeasure of her eye.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00279">[Enter Lodowick.]</p>
			<p id="id00280">What says the more than Cleopatra’s match<br/> To Caesar now?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00281">Lodowick.<br/> That yet, my liege, ere night<br/> She will resolve your majesty.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00282">[Drum within.]</p>
			<p id="id00283">King Edward.<br/> What drum is this that thunders forth this march,<br/> To start the tender Cupid in my bosom?<br/> Poor shipskin, how it brawls with him that beateth it!<br/> Go, break the thundring parchment bottom out,<br/> And I will teach it to conduct sweet lines<br/> Unto the bosom of a heavenly Nymph;<br/> For I will use it as my writing paper,<br/> And so reduce him from a scolding drum<br/> To be the herald and dear counsel bearer<br/> Betwixt a goddess and a mighty king.<br/> Go, bid the drummer learn to touch the Lute,<br/> Or hang him in the braces of his drum,<br/> For now we think it an uncivil thing,<br/> To trouble heaven with such harsh resounds:<br/> Away!<br/></p>
			<p id="id00284">[Exit.]</p>
			<p id="id00285">The quarrel that I have requires no arms<br/> But these of mine: and these shall meet my foe<br/> In a deep march of penetrable groans;<br/> My eyes shall be my arrows, and my sighs<br/> Shall serve me as the vantage of the wind,<br/> To whirl away my sweetest artillery.<br/> Ah, but, alas, she wins the sun of me,<br/> For that is she her self, and thence it comes<br/> That Poets term the wanton warrior blind;<br/> But love hath eyes as judgement to his steps,<br/> Till too much loved glory dazzles them.⁠—<br/></p>
			<p id="id00286">[Enter Lodowick.]</p>
			<p id="id00287">How now?</p>
			<p id="id00288">Lodowick.<br/> My liege, the drum that stroke the lusty march,<br/> Stands with Prince Edward, your thrice valiant son.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00289">[Enter Prince Edward.]</p>
			<p id="id00290">King Edward.<br/> I see the boy; oh, how his mother’s face,<br/> Modeled in his, corrects my strayed desire,<br/> And rates my heart, and chides my thievish eye,<br/> Who, being rich enough in seeing her,<br/> Yet seeks elsewhere: and basest theft is that<br/> Which cannot cloak it self on poverty.⁠—<br/> Now, boy, what news?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00291">Prince Edward.<br/> I have assembled, my dear Lord and father,<br/> The choicest buds of all our English blood<br/> For our affairs in France; and here we come<br/> To take direction from your majesty.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00292">King Edward.<br/> Still do I see in him delineate<br/> His mother’s visage; those his eyes are hers,<br/> Who, looking wistely on me, make me blush:<br/> For faults against themselves give evidence;<br/> Lust is fire, and men like lanthornes show<br/> Light lust within them selves, even through them selves.<br/> Away, loose silks of wavering vanity!<br/> Shall the large limit of fair Brittain<br/> By me be overthrown, and shall I not<br/> Master this little mansion of my self?<br/> Give me an Armor of eternal steel!<br/> I go to conquer kings; and shall I not then<br/> Subdue my self? and be my enemy’s friend?<br/> It must not be.⁠—Come, boy, forward, advance!<br/> Let’s with our colours sweet the Air of France.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00293">[Enter Lodowick.]</p>
			<p id="id00294">Lodowick.<br/> My liege, the Countess with a smiling cheer<br/> Desires access unto your Majesty.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00295">King Edward.<br/> Why, there it goes! That very smile of hers<br/> Hath ransomed captive France, and set the King,<br/> The Dauphin, and the Peers at liberty.⁠—<br/> Go, leave me, Ned, and revel with thy friends.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00296">[Exit Prince Edward.]</p>
			<p id="id00297">Thy mother is but black, and thou, like her,<br/> Dost put it in my mind how foul she is.⁠—<br/> Go, fetch the Countess hither in thy hand,<br/> And let her chase away these winter clouds,<br/> For she gives beauty both to heaven and earth.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00298">[Exit Lodowick.]</p>
			<p id="id00299">The sin is more to hack and hew poor men,<br/> Than to embrace in an unlawful bed<br/> The register of all rarities<br/> Since Letherne Adam till this youngest hour.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00300">[Enter Countess escorted by Lodowick.]</p>
			<p id="id00301">Go, Lodowick, put thy hand into my purse,<br/> Play, spend, give, riot, waste, do what thou wilt,<br/> So thou wilt hence awhile and leave me here.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00302">[Exit Lodowick.]</p>
			<p id="id00303">Now, my soul’s playfellow, art thou come<br/> To speak the more than heavenly word of yea<br/> To my objection in thy beauteous love?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00304">Countess.<br/> My father on his blessing hath commanded⁠—<br/></p>
			<p id="id00305">King Edward.<br/> That thou shalt yield to me?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00306">Countess.<br/> Aye, dear my liege, your due.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00307">King Edward.<br/> And that, my dearest love, can be no less<br/> Than right for right and tender love for love.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00308">Countess.<br/> Then wrong for wrong and endless hate for hate.⁠—<br/> But⁠—sith I see your majesty so bent,<br/> That my unwillingness, my husband’s love,<br/> Your high estate, nor no respect respected<br/> Can be my help, but that your mightiness<br/> Will overbear and awe these dear regards⁠—<br/> I bind my discontent to my content,<br/> And what I would not I’ll compel I will,<br/> Provided that your self remove those lets<br/> That stand between your highness’ love and mine.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00309">King Edward.<br/> Name them, fair Countess, and, by heaven, I will.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00310">Countess.<br/> It is their lives that stand between our love,<br/> That I would have choked up, my sovereign.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00311">King Edward.<br/> Whose lives, my Lady?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00312">Countess.<br/> My thrice loving liege,<br/> Your Queen and Salisbury, my wedded husband,<br/> Who living have that title in our love,<br/> That we cannot bestow but by their death.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00313">King Edward.<br/> Thy opposition is beyond our Law.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00314">Countess.<br/> So is your desire: if the law<br/> Can hinder you to execute the one,<br/> Let it forbid you to attempt the other.<br/> I cannot think you love me as you say,<br/> Unless you do make good what you have sworn.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00315">King Edward.<br/> No more; thy husband and the Queen shall die.<br/> Fairer thou art by far than Hero was,<br/> Beardless Leander not so strong as I:<br/> He swom an easy current for his love,<br/> But I will through a Hellespont of blood,<br/> To arrive at Cestus where my Hero lies.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00316">Countess.<br/> Nay, you’ll do more; you’ll make the River to<br/> With their heart bloods that keep our love asunder,<br/> Of which my husband and your wife are twain.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00317" style="margin-top: 2em">King Edward.<br/> Thy beauty makes them guilty of their death<br/> And gives in evidence that they shall die;<br/> Upon which verdict I, their Judge, condemn them.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00318">Countess.<br/> [Aside.] O perjured beauty, more corrupted Judge!<br/> When to the great Star-chamber o’er our heads<br/> The universal Sessions calls to count<br/> This packing evil, we both shall tremble for it.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00319">King Edward.<br/> What says my fair love? is she resolute?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00320">Countess.<br/> Resolute to be dissolute; and, therefore, this:<br/> Keep but thy word, great king, and I am thine.<br/> Stand where thou dost, I’ll part a little from thee,<br/> And see how I will yield me to thy hands.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00321">[Turning suddenly upon him, and shewing two Daggers.]</p>
			<p id="id00322">Here by my side doth hang my wedding knifes:<br/> Take thou the one, and with it kill thy Queen,<br/> And learn by me to find her where she lies;<br/> And with this other I’ll dispatch my love,<br/> Which now lies fast a sleep within my heart:<br/> When they are gone, then I’ll consent to love.<br/> Stir not, lascivious king, to hinder me;<br/> My resolution is more nimbler far,<br/> Than thy prevention can be in my rescue,<br/> And if thou stir, I strike; therefore, stand still,<br/> And hear the choice that I will put thee to:<br/> Either swear to leave thy most unholy suit<br/> And never hence forth to solicit me;<br/> Or else, by heaven, this sharp pointed knife<br/> Shall stain thy earth with that which thou would stain,<br/> My poor chaste blood. Swear, Edward, swear,<br/> Or I will strike and die before thee here.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00323">King Edward.<br/> Even by that power I swear, that gives me now<br/> The power to be ashamed of my self,<br/> I never mean to part my lips again<br/> In any words that tends to such a suit.<br/> Arise, true English Lady, whom our Isle<br/> May better boast of than ever Roman might<br/> Of her, whose ransacked treasury hath taskt<br/> The vain endeavor of so many pens:<br/> Arise, and be my fault thy honor’s fame,<br/> Which after ages shall enrich thee with.<br/> I am awakened from this idle dream.⁠—<br/> Warwick, my Son, Darby, Artois, and Audley!<br/> Brave warriors all, where are you all this while?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00324">[Enter all.]</p>
			<p id="id00325">Warwick, I make thee Warden of the North:<br/> Thou, Prince of Wales, and Audley, straight to Sea;<br/> Scour to New-haven; some there stay for me:<br/> My self, Artois, and Darby will through Flanders,<br/> To greet our friends there and to crave their aide.<br/> This night will scarce suffice a faithful lover;<br/> For, ere the Sun shall gild the eastern sky,<br/> We’ll wake him with our Marshall harmony.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00326">[Exeunt.]</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
