<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 12</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4 id="id00486" style="margin-top: 2em">Act IV. Scene II. Picardy. The English Camp before Calais.</h4>
			<p id="id00487">[Enter King Edward and Derby, with Soldiers.]</p>
			<p id="id00488">King Edward.<br/> Since they refuse our proffered league, my Lord,<br/> And will not ope their gates, and let us in,<br/> We will intrench our selves on every side,<br/> That neither vituals nor supply of men<br/> May come to succour this accursed town:<br/> Famine shall combat where our swords are stopped.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00489">[Enter six poor Frenchmen.]</p>
			<p id="id00490">Derby.<br/> The promised aid, that made them stand aloof,<br/> Is now retired and gone an other way:<br/> It will repent them of their stubborn will.<br/> But what are these poor ragged slaves, my Lord?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00491">King Edward.<br/> Ask what they are; it seems, they come from Callis.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00492">Derby.<br/> You wretched patterns of despair and woe,<br/> What are you, living men or gliding ghosts,<br/> Crept from your graves to walk upon the earth?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00493">Poor.<br/> No ghosts, my Lord, but men that breath a life<br/> Far worse than is the quiet sleep of death:<br/> We are distressed poor inhabitants,<br/> That long have been diseased, sick, and lame;<br/> And now, because we are not fit to serve,<br/> The Captain of the town hath thrust us forth,<br/> That so expense of victuals may be saved.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00494">King Edward.<br/> A charitable deed, no doubt, and worthy praise!<br/> But how do you imagine then to speed?<br/> We are your enemies; in such a case<br/> We can no less but put ye to the sword,<br/> Since, when we proffered truce, it was refused.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00495">Poor.<br/> And if your grace no otherwise vouchsafe,<br/> As welcome death is unto us as life.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00496">King Edward.<br/> Poor silly men, much wronged and more distressed!<br/> Go, Derby, go, and see they be relieved;<br/> Command that victuals be appointed them,<br/> And give to every one five Crowns a piece.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00497">[Exeunt Derby and Frenchmen.]</p>
			<p id="id00498">The Lion scorns to touch the yielding prey,<br/> And Edward’s sword must flesh it self in such<br/> As wilful stubbornness hath made perverse.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00499">[Enter Lord Percy.]</p>
			<p id="id00500">King Edward.<br/> Lord Percy! welcome: what’s the news in England?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00501">Percy.<br/> The Queen, my Lord, comes here to your Grace,<br/> And from her highness and the Lord viceregent<br/> I bring this happy tidings of success:<br/> David of Scotland, lately up in arms,<br/> Thinking, belike, he soonest should prevail,<br/> Your highness being absent from the Realm,<br/> Is, by the fruitful service of your peers<br/> And painful travel of the Queen her self,<br/> That, big with child, was every day in arms,<br/> Vanquished, subdued, and taken prisoner.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00502">King Edward.<br/> Thanks, Percy, for thy news, with all my heart!<br/> What was he took him prisoner in the field?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00503">Percy.<br/> A Esquire, my Lord; John Copland is his name:<br/> Who since, intreated by her Majesty,<br/> Denies to make surrender of his prize<br/> To any but unto your grace alone;<br/> Whereat the Queen is grievously displeased.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00504">King Edward.<br/> Well, then we’ll have a Pursiuvant despatched,<br/> To summon Copland hither out of hand,<br/> And with him he shall bring his prisoner king.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00505" style="margin-top: 2em">Percy.<br/> The Queen’s, my Lord, her self by this at Sea,<br/> And purposeth, as soon as wind will serve,<br/> To land at Callis, and to visit you.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00506">King Edward.<br/> She shall be welcome; and, to wait her coming,<br/> I’ll pitch my tent near to the sandy shore.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00507">[Enter a French Captain.]</p>
			<p id="id00508">Captain.<br/> The Burgesses of Callis, mighty king,<br/> Have by a counsel willingly decreed<br/> To yield the town and Castle to your hands,<br/> Upon condition it will please your grace<br/> To grant them benefit of life and goods.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00509">King Edward.<br/> They will so! Then, belike, they may command,<br/> Dispose, elect, and govern as they list.<br/> No, sirra, tell them, since they did refuse<br/> Our princely clemency at first proclaimed,<br/> They shall not have it now, although they would;<br/> I will accept of nought but fire and sword,<br/> Except, within these two days, six of them,<br/> That are the wealthiest merchants in the town,<br/> Come naked, all but for their linen shirts,<br/> With each a halter hanged about his neck,<br/> And prostrate yield themselves, upon their knees,<br/> To be afflicted, hanged, or what I please;<br/> And so you may inform their masterships.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00510">[Exeunt Edward and Percy.]</p>
			<p id="id00511">Captain.<br/> Why, this it is to trust a broken staff:<br/> Had we not been persuaded, John our King<br/> Would with his army have relieved the town,<br/> We had not stood upon defiance so:<br/> But now tis past that no man can recall,<br/> And better some do go to wrack them all.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00512">[Exit.]</p>
			<h3 id="id00513" style="margin-top: 3em">Act IV. Scene III. Poitou. Fields near Poitiers. The French camp; Tent of the Duke of Normandy.</h3>
			<p id="id00514">[Enter Charles of Normandy and Villiers.]</p>
			<p id="id00515">Charles.<br/> I wonder, Villiers, thou shouldest importune me<br/> For one that is our deadly enemy.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00516">Villiers.<br/> Not for his sake, my gracious Lord, so much<br/> Am I become an earnest advocate,<br/> As that thereby my ransom will be quit.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00517">Charles.<br/> Thy ransom, man? why needest thou talk of that?<br/> Art thou not free? and are not all occasions,<br/> That happen for advantage of our foes,<br/> To be accepted of, and stood upon?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00518">Villiers.<br/> No, good my Lord, except the same be just;<br/> For profit must with honor be comixt,<br/> Or else our actions are but scandalous.<br/> But, letting pass their intricate objections,<br/> Wilt please your highness to subscribe, or no?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00519">Charles.<br/> Villiers, I will not, nor I cannot do it;<br/> Salisbury shall not have his will so much,<br/> To claim a passport how it pleaseth himself.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00520">Villiers.<br/> Why, then I know the extremity, my Lord;<br/> I must return to prison whence I came.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00521">Charles.<br/> Return? I hope thou wilt not;<br/> What bird that hath escaped the fowler’s gin,<br/> Will not beware how she’s ensnared again?<br/> Or, what is he, so senseless and secure,<br/> That, having hardly past a dangerous gul,<br/> Will put him self in peril there again?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00522">Villiers.<br/> Ah, but it is mine oath, my gracious Lord,<br/> Which I in conscience may not violate,<br/> Or else a kingdom should not draw me hence.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00523">Charles.<br/> Thine oath? why, tat doth bind thee to abide:<br/> Hast thou not sworn obedience to thy Prince?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00524">Villiers.<br/> In all things that uprightly he commands:<br/> But either to persuade or threaten me,<br/> Not to perform the covenant of my word,<br/> Is lawless, and I need not to obey.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00525">Charles.<br/> Why, is it lawful for a man to kill,<br/> And not, to break a promise with his foe?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00526">Villiers.<br/> To kill, my Lord, when war is once proclaimed,<br/> So that our quarrel be for wrongs received,<br/> No doubt, is lawfully permitted us;<br/> But in an oath we must be well advised,<br/> How we do swear, and, when we once have sworn,<br/> Not to infringe it, though we die therefore:<br/> Therefore, my Lord, as willing I return,<br/> As if I were to fly to paradise.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00527">Charles.<br/> Stay, my Villiers; thine honorable min<br/> Deserves to be eternally admired.<br/> Thy suit shall be no longer thus deferred:<br/> Give me the paper, I’ll subscribe to it;<br/> And, wheretofore I loved thee as Villiers,<br/> Hereafter I’ll embrace thee as my self.<br/> Stay, and be still in favour with thy Lord.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00528">Villiers.<br/> I humbly thank you grace; I must dispatch,<br/> And send this passport first unto the Earl,<br/> And then I will attend your highness pleasure.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00529">Charles.<br/> Do so, Villiers;⁠—and Charles, when he hath need,<br/> Be such his soldiers, howsoever he speed!<br/></p>
			<p id="id00530">[Exit Villiers.]</p>
			<p id="id00531">[Enter King John.]</p>
			<p id="id00532">King John.<br/> Come, Charles, and arm thee; Edward is entrapped,<br/> The Prince of Wales is fallen into our hands,<br/> And we have compassed him; he cannot escape.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00533">Charles.<br/> But will your highness fight to day?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00534">King John.<br/> What else, my son? he’s scarce eight thousand strong,<br/> And we are threescore thousand at the least.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00535">Charles.<br/> I have a prophecy, my gracious Lord,<br/> Wherein is written what success is like<br/> To happen us in this outrageous war;<br/> It was delivered me at Cresses field<br/> By one that is an aged Hermit there.<br/> [Reads.] ‘When feathered foul shall make thine army tremble,<br/> And flint stones rise and break the battle ray,<br/> Then think on him that doth not now dissemble;<br/> For that shall be the hapless dreadful day:<br/> Yet, in the end, thy foot thou shalt advance<br/> As far in England as thy foe in France.’<br/></p>
			<p id="id00536">King John.<br/> By this it seems we shall be fortunate:<br/> For as it is impossible that stones<br/> Should ever rise and break the battle ray,<br/> Or airy foul make men in arms to quake,<br/> So is it like, we shall not be subdued:<br/> Or say this might be true, yet in the end,<br/> Since he doth promise we shall drive him hence<br/> And forage their Country as they have done ours,<br/> By this revenge that loss will seem the less.<br/> But all are frivolous fancies, toys, and dreams:<br/> Once we are sure we have ensnared the son,<br/> Catch we the father after how we can.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00537">[Exeunt.]</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
