<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 7</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4 id="id00363" style="margin-top: 2em">Act III. Scene II. Picardy. Fields near Cressi.</h4>
			<p id="id00364">[Enter two French men; a woman and two little<br/> Children meet them, and other Citizens.]<br/></p>
			<p id="id00365">One.<br/> Well met, my masters: how now? what’s the news?<br/> And wherefore are ye laden thus with stuff?<br/> What, is it quarter day that you remove,<br/> And carry bag and baggage too?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00366">Two.<br/> Quarter day? Aye, and quartering day, I fear:<br/> Have ye not heard the news that flies abroad?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00367">One.<br/> What news?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00368">Three.<br/> How the French Navy is destroyed at Sea,<br/> And that the English Army is arrived.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00369">One.<br/> What then?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00370">Two.<br/> What then, quoth you? why, ist not time to fly,<br/> When envy and destruction is so nigh?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00371">One.<br/> Content thee, man; they are far enough from hence,<br/> And will be met, I warrant ye, to their cost,<br/> Before they break so far into the Realm.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00372">Two.<br/> Aye, so the Grasshopper doth spend the time<br/> In mirthful jollity, till Winter come;<br/> And then too late he would redeem his time,<br/> When frozen cold hath nipped his careless head.<br/> He, that no sooner will provide a Cloak,<br/> Then when he sees it doth begin to reign,<br/> May, peradventure, for his negligence,<br/> Be throughly washed, when he suspects it not.<br/> We that have charge and such a train as this,<br/> Must look in time to look for them and us,<br/> Least, when we would, we cannot be relieved.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00373">One.<br/> Belike, you then despair of all success,<br/> And think your Country will be subjugate.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00374">Three.<br/> We cannot tell; tis good to fear the worst.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00375">One.<br/> Yet rather fight, then, like unnatural sons,<br/> Forsake your loving parents in distress.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00376">Two.<br/> Tush, they that have already taken arms<br/> Are many fearful millions in respect<br/> Of that small handful of our enemies;<br/> But tis a rightful quarrel must prevail;<br/> Edward is son unto our late king’s sister,<br/> When John Valois is three degrees removed.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00377">Woman.<br/> Besides, there goes a Prophesy abroad,<br/> Published by one that was a Friar once,<br/> Whose Oracles have many times proved true;<br/> And now he says, the time will shortly come,<br/> When as a Lyon, roused in the west,<br/> Shall carry hence the fluerdeluce of France:<br/> These, I can tell ye, and such like surmises<br/> Strike many French men cold unto the heart.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00378">[Enter a French man.]</p>
			<p id="id00379">Four.<br/> Fly, country men and citizens of France!<br/> Sweet flowering peace, the root of happy life,<br/> Is quite abandoned and expulst the land;<br/> In stead of whom ransacked constraining war<br/> Sits like to Ravens upon your houses’ tops;<br/> Slaughter and mischief walk within your streets,<br/> And, unrestrained, make havoc as they pass;<br/> The form whereof even now my self beheld<br/> Upon this fair mountain whence I came.<br/> For so far of as I directed mine eyes,<br/> I might perceive five Cities all on fire,<br/> Corn fields and vineyards, burning like an oven;<br/> And, as the reaking vapour in the wind<br/> Turned but aside, I like wise might discern<br/> The poor inhabitants, escaped the flame,<br/> Fall numberless upon the soldiers’ pikes.<br/> Three ways these dreadful ministers of wrath<br/> Do tread the measures of their tragic march:<br/> Upon the right hand comes the conquering King,<br/> Upon the left his hot unbridled son,<br/> And in the midst our nation’s glittering host,<br/> All which, though distant yet, conspire in one,<br/> To leave a desolation where they come.<br/> Fly therefore, Citizens, if you be wise,<br/> Seek out some habitation further off:<br/> Here is you stay, your wives will be abused,<br/> Your treasure shared before your weeping eyes;<br/> Shelter you your selves, for now the storm doth rise.<br/> Away, away; me thinks I hear their drums:⁠—<br/> Ah, wretched France, I greatly fear thy fall;<br/> Thy glory shaketh like a tottering wall.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00380">[Exeunt.]</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
