<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 13</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-13" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4 id="id00538" style="margin-top: 2em">Act IV. Scene IV. The same. The English Camp.</h4>
			<p id="id00539">[Enter Prince Edward, Audley, and others.]</p>
			<p id="id00540">Prince Edward.<br/> Audley, the arms of death embrace us round,<br/> And comfort have we none, save that to die<br/> We pay sower earnest for a sweeter life.<br/> At Cressey field out Clouds of Warlike smoke<br/> Choked up those French mouths &amp; dissevered them;<br/> But now their multitudes of millions hide,<br/> Masking as twere, the beauteous burning Sun,<br/> Leaving no hope to us, but sullen dark<br/> And eyeless terror of all ending night.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00541">Audley.<br/> This sudden, mighty, and expedient head<br/> That they have made, fair prince, is wonderful.<br/> Before us in the valley lies the king,<br/> Vantaged with all that heaven and earth can yield;<br/> His party stronger battled than our whole:<br/> His son, the braving Duke of Normandy,<br/> Hath trimmed the Mountain on our right hand up<br/> In shining plate, that now the aspiring hill<br/> Shews like a silver quarry or an orb,<br/> Aloft the which the Banners, bannarets,<br/> And new replenished pendants cuff the air<br/> And beat the winds, that for their gaudiness<br/> Struggles to kiss them: on our left hand lies<br/> Phillip, the younger issue of the king,<br/> Coating the other hill in such array,<br/> That all his guilded upright pikes do seem<br/> Straight trees of gold, the pendants leaves;<br/> And their device of Antique heraldry,<br/> Quartered in colours, seeming sundry fruits,<br/> Makes it the Orchard of the Hesperides:<br/> Behind us too the hill doth bear his height,<br/> For like a half Moon, opening but one way,<br/> It rounds us in; there at our backs are lodged<br/> The fatal Crossbows, and the battle there<br/> Is governed by the rough Chattillion.<br/> Then thus it stands: the valley for our flight<br/> The king binds in; the hills on either hand<br/> Are proudly royalized by his sons;<br/> And on the Hill behind stands certain death<br/> In pay and service with Chattillion.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00542" style="margin-top: 2em">Prince Edward.<br/> Death’s name is much more mighty than his deeds;<br/> Thy parcelling this power hath made it more.<br/> As many sands as these my hands can hold,<br/> Are but my handful of so many sands;<br/> Then, all the world, and call it but a power,<br/> Easily ta’en up, and quickly thrown away:<br/> But if I stand to count them sand by sand,<br/> The number would confound my memory,<br/> And make a thousand millions of a task,<br/> Which briefly is no more, indeed, than one.<br/> These quarters, squadrons, and these regiments,<br/> Before, behind us, and on either hand,<br/> Are but a power. When we name a man,<br/> His hand, his foot, his head hath several strengths;<br/> And being all but one self instant strength,<br/> Why, all this many, Audley, is but one,<br/> And we can call it all but one man’s strength.<br/> He that hath far to go, tells it by miles;<br/> If he should tell the steps, it kills his heart:<br/> The drops are infinite, that make a flood,<br/> And yet, thou knowest, we call it but a Rain.<br/> There is but one France, one king of France,<br/> That France hath no more kings; and that same king<br/> Hath but the puissant legion of one king,<br/> And we have one: then apprehend no odds,<br/> For one to one is fair equality.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00543">[Enter an Herald from King John.]</p>
			<p id="id00544">Prince Edward.<br/> What tidings, messenger? be plain and brief.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00545">Herald.<br/> The king of France, my sovereign Lord and master,<br/> Greets by me his foe, the Prince of Wales:<br/> If thou call forth a hundred men of name,<br/> Of Lords, Knights, Squires, and English gentlemen,<br/> And with thy self and those kneel at his feet,<br/> He straight will fold his bloody colours up,<br/> And ransom shall redeem lives forfeited;<br/> If not, this day shall drink more English blood,<br/> Than ere was buried in our British earth.<br/> What is the answer to his proffered mercy?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00546">Prince Edward.<br/> This heaven, that covers France, contains the mercy<br/> That draws from me submissive orizons;<br/> That such base breath should vanish from my lips,<br/> To urge the plea of mercy to a man,<br/> The Lord forbid! Return, and tell the king,<br/> My tongue is made of steel, and it shall beg<br/> My mercy on his coward burgonet;<br/> Tell him, my colours are as red as his,<br/> My men as bold, our English arms as strong:<br/> Return him my defiance in his face.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00547">Herald.<br/> I go.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00548">[Exit.]</p>
			<p id="id00549">[Enter another Herald.]</p>
			<p id="id00550">Prince Edward.<br/> What news with thee?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00551">Herald.<br/> The Duke of Normandy, my Lord &amp; master,<br/> Pitying thy youth is so ingirt with peril,<br/> By me hath sent a nimble jointed jennet,<br/> As swift as ever yet thou didst bestride,<br/> And therewithall he counsels thee to fly;<br/> Else death himself hath sworn that thou shalt die.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00552">Prince Edward.<br/> Back with the beast unto the beast that sent him!<br/> Tell him I cannot sit a coward’s horse;<br/> Bid him to day bestride the jade himself,<br/> For I will stain my horse quite o’er with blood,<br/> And double gild my spurs, but I will catch him;<br/> So tell the carping boy, and get thee gone.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00553">[Exit Herald.]</p>
			<p id="id00554">[Enter another Herald.]</p>
			<p id="id00555">Herald.<br/> Edward of Wales, Phillip, the second son<br/> To the most mighty christian king of France,<br/> Seeing thy body’s living date expired,<br/> All full of charity and christian love,<br/> Commends this book, full fraught with prayers,<br/> To thy fair hand and for thy hour of life<br/> Intreats thee that thou meditate therein,<br/> And arm thy soul for her long journey towards⁠—<br/> Thus have I done his bidding, and return.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00556">Prince Edward.<br/> Herald of Phillip, greet thy Lord from me:<br/> All good that he can send, I can receive;<br/> But thinkst thou not, the unadvised boy<br/> Hath wronged himself in thus far tendering me?<br/> Happily he cannot pray without the book⁠—<br/> I think him no divine extemporall⁠—,<br/> Then render back this common place of prayer,<br/> To do himself good in adversity;<br/> Beside he knows not my sins’ quality,<br/> And therefore knows no prayers for my avail;<br/> Ere night his prayer may be to pray to God,<br/> To put it in my heart to hear his prayer.<br/> So tell the courtly wanton, and be gone.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00557">Herald.<br/> I go.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00558">[Exit.]</p>
			<p id="id00559">Prince Edward.<br/> How confident their strength and number makes them!⁠—<br/> Now, Audley, sound those silver wings of thine,<br/> And let those milk white messengers of time<br/> Shew thy times learning in this dangerous time.<br/> Thy self art bruis’d and bit with many broils,<br/> And stratagems forepast with iron pens<br/> Are texted in thine honorable face;<br/> Thou art a married man in this distress,<br/> But danger woos me as a blushing maid:<br/> Teach me an answer to this perilous time.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00560">Audley.<br/> To die is all as common as to live:<br/> The one ince-wise, the other holds in chase;<br/> For, from the instant we begin to live,<br/> We do pursue and hunt the time to die:<br/> First bud we, then we blow, and after seed,<br/> Then, presently, we fall; and, as a shade<br/> Follows the body, so we follow death.<br/> If, then, we hunt for death, why do we fear it?<br/> If we fear it, why do we follow it?<br/> If we do fear, how can we shun it?<br/> If we do fear, with fear we do but aide<br/> The thing we fear to seize on us the sooner:<br/> If we fear not, then no resolved proffer<br/> Can overthrow the limit of our fate;<br/> For, whether ripe or rotten, drop we shall,<br/> As we do draw the lottery of our doom.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00561">Prince Edward.<br/> Ah, good old man, a thousand thousand armors<br/> These words of thine have buckled on my back:<br/> Ah, what an idiot hast thou made of life,<br/> To seek the thing it fears! and how disgraced<br/> The imperial victory of murdering death,<br/> Since all the lives his conquering arrows strike<br/> Seek him, and he not them, to shame his glory!<br/> I will not give a penny for a life,<br/> Nor half a halfpenny to shun grim death,<br/> Since for to live is but to seek to die,<br/> And dying but beginning of new life.<br/> Let come the hour when he that rules it will!<br/> To live or die I hold indifferent.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00562">[Exeunt.]</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
