<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 16</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-16" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4 id="id00605" style="margin-top: 2em">Act IV. Scene VII. The same. Another Part of the Field of Battle.</h4>
			<p id="id00606">[Alarum. Enter King John.]</p>
			<p id="id00607">King John.<br/> Our multitudes are in themselves confounded,<br/> Dismayed, and distraught; swift starting fear<br/> Hath buzzed a cold dismay through all our army,<br/> And every petty disadvantage prompts<br/> The fear possessed abject soul to fly.<br/> My self, whose spirit is steel to their dull lead,<br/> What with recalling of the prophecy,<br/> And that our native stones from English arms<br/> Rebel against us, find myself attainted<br/> With strong surprise of weak and yielding fear.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00608">[Enter Charles.]</p>
			<p id="id00609">Charles.<br/> Fly, father, fly! the French do kill the French,<br/> Some that would stand let drive at some that fly;<br/> Our drums strike nothing but discouragement,<br/> Our trumpets sound dishonor and retire;<br/> The spirit of fear, that feareth nought but death,<br/> Cowardly works confusion on it self.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00610">[Enter Phillip.]</p>
			<p id="id00611">Phillip.<br/> Pluck out your eyes, and see not this day’s shame!<br/> An arm hath beat an army; one poor David<br/> Hath with a stone foiled twenty stout Goliahs;<br/> Some twenty naked starvelings with small flints,<br/> Hath driven back a puissant host of men,<br/> Arrayed and fenced in all accomplements.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00612">King John.<br/> Mordieu, they quait at us, and kill us up;<br/> No less than forty thousand wicked elders<br/> Have forty lean slaves this day stoned to death.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00613">Charles.<br/> O, that I were some other countryman!<br/> This day hath set derision on the French,<br/> And all the world will blurt and scorn at us.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00614">King John.<br/> What, is there no hope left?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00615">Phillip.<br/> No hope, but death, to bury up our shame.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00616">King John.<br/> Make up once more with me; the twentieth part<br/> Of those that live, are men inow to quail<br/> The feeble handful on the adverse part.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00617">Charles.<br/> Then charge again: if heaven be not opposed,<br/> We cannot lose the day.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00618">King John.<br/> On, away!<br/></p>
			<p id="id00619">[Exeunt.]</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
